P1: THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG
P3: FACULTY OF LAW
P5: PROPERTY TRANSACTIONS (2026-27)
P7: LECTURES NO 5, 6 and 7  
P9: PROOF OF TITLE  (APPLICATION)
P12: We have considered the duty to give good title and show good title. Before completion, the purchaser would normally raise requisitions and the vendor would need to prove good title. This exercise would invariably require examination of the land search and consideration of the chain of title of previous owners. The vendor would provide the originals or certified copies of the relevant title deeds to the purchaser’s solicitors, for their perusal and consideration. It is the duty of the purchaser’s solicitors to consider the title deeds, and see if there is anything which gives rise to a defective or defeasible title. The vendor has a duty to provide to the purchaser, by way of showing title, the relevant documents of title by the date expressly agreed or, in the absence of such date, sufficiently long in advance of the completion date to allow the purchaser to raise proper requisitions. 
P14: In the absence of an express term in the sale and purchase agreement as to the time within which title must be shown, the courts will imply a term that title must be shown within a reasonable time before the completion date: Ng Chek Kok v Kiu Wai Ming [1992] 1 HKLR 5, CA. Title must also be shown sufficiently long in advance of the completion date to allow the purchaser to raise requisitions: Yeung Sau Chuen Sammy v Chung Chun Ting [1997] 4 HKC 34. 
P16: Regardless of whether the vendor managed to show good title, he/she must give good title.
P18: Let us now consider some common problems in different `links in the chain’. This is by no means an exhaustive list, but should be sufficient for exam purposes. 
P21: PART A: COMMON PROBLEMS IN THE CHAIN OF TITLE 
P23: Transmission on death
P26: Where there has been transmission of the property on the death of an owner, the vendor must produce the death certificate, the probate or letters of administration and the subsequent assent in writing (no deed required where real estate devised by will) or assignment (where deceased dies intestate) to the new owner. The vendor must also prove that the property was not restricted by the will from being sold under certain conditions. In Chan Chiung Yo v Sam Yu Lik Eric [2024] HKCFI 1377 the car parking space was restricted from being sold for a period of ten years from the date of death of the owners.        
P29: Sale for the purpose of administration of the estate
P31: Where property has been sold by personal representatives, it must clearly be established that they have power to sell and pass a good title. Where a purchaser buys property from a personal representative, it is presumed that the property has been sold for the purpose of administration of the estate; this means that the purchaser will receive good title and has no duty to make, nor indeed should he make, inquiries as to whether the sale was necessary for the purpose of the administration of the estate: Chun Hon Wai v Junichi Takashima [2000] 2 HKC 777, CA, applied in Sze King Lun v Nicerich Investments Ltd [2001] 1 HKLRD 243. 
P33: If there is evidence that the sale was for an improper purpose, the presumption will not apply: see Chan Yat Wah v Moonland Enterprises Ltd [2001] 1 HKLRD 45.Where an action already commenced against executrix (present vendor) on grounds that she was selling for her own benefit; presumption not applicable).
P35: Proof that person to whom property was assented (will) or assigned. (intestacy) was entitled to receive the property
P37: An assent (in writing) is required where the executor transfers real property to the devisee in accordance with the deceased’s will, whereas an assignment (by deed) is required where an administrator transfers real property to a person entitled on the deceased’s intestacy or to a third person.  A beneficiary under a will has no interest in any part of the estate before the assent is signed: see Pacific Harbor Advisors Pte Ltd v Winson Federal Ltd (unreported) HCMP 1285/2015, 21/08/2015.
P38:  
P39: The vendor must prove that the person to whom property was assented (where will) or assigned (where intestacy) was entitled to receive the property.
P41: See Sun Sek Haw v Au So Kum [1999] 3 HKC 92, CA (owner of property died intestate leaving husband and five children; husband and one child as administrators assigned to husband alone; held title defective). 
P43: See also So Mariko v Tse Chun Chung John (unreported) CACV 212/2010, 15/04/2011 (deceased died intestate and administratrix appointed; property assigned without any consideration by administratrix to herself and another three other beneficiaries joining in as confirmors; purchaser raised a requisition requesting satisfactory evidence that the three confirmors had been the only persons entitled to the property under the deceased’s intestacy; solicitor in firm who had acted both at the time of the grant of letters of administration and in preparing the assignment provided a statutory declaration that the three confirmors had been the only persons entitled to the property on the death of the deceased; purchasers not satisfied with the statutory declaration; held that the best evidence to answer the requisition would have been the production of a certified copy of the affirmation made by the administratrix filed in the Probate Registry in support of her application for letters of administration since this affirmation would have shown the names of all beneficiaries entitled to share in the deceased’s estate; the affirmation would not, however, have been conclusive as to the identities of the beneficiaries since it merely reflected the administratrix’s opinion on this matter and it was always possible that she might have omitted to name a beneficiary in her affidavit, 12 years had now passed and there was no evidence of any claim by a missing beneficiary; the statutory declaration provided proper conveyancing evidence and the vendor had shown good title). 
P45: For application of these two case laws, see Ample Happiness Ltd v Sunrise Enterprise Holdings Ltd [2022] HKDC 1007 and Liu Wai Yin v Falic Trading Co Ltd [2023] HKCFI 1295.    
P47: Sale by personal representative to himself or family member
P49: Sale by a personal representative to himself or a family member may render the title defeasible under s 55 Probate and Administration Ordinance since sale voidable at instance of any other person interested in property sold: Feerni Development Ltd v Daniel Wong & Partners (a firm) [2001] 1 HKC 373, [2001] 2 HKLRD 13. 
P51: Breach by personal representative of his fiduciary duty in administering the estate
P53: If a personal representative assigns the deceased’s property to a third person in a manner which breaches his fiduciary duties in administering the estate, this might render the title of the third person defeasible: see Lam Sik Shi v Lam Sik Ying, Administrator of the Estate of Lam Tim, alias Stan Lam Tim, deceased (unreported) HCA 1605/2004, 03/10/2016 (assignment at serious undervalue by personal representative; sale set aside).
P56: Special considerations where co-ownership of the property
P58: Where the property is jointly owned by two or more persons, special considerations apply. 
P60: Joint tenancy: If the property is owned by joint owners by way of a joint tenancy, the jus accrescendi (right of survivorship) will apply and the remaining joint owner will by law inherit his co-owner’s share. The property will not appear in the Schedule to the probate or grant of letters of administration. Only the death certificate needs to be produced by way of this link in the chain of proof of title. 
P62: Tenancy in common: Where, however, the co-owners own the property as tenants in common, the right of survivorship will not apply and the surviving co-owner who inherits must prove his right to inherit by producing the death certificate, will and probate or letters of administration and the assignment (where intestacy) or assent (to devisee under will) of the property to him.
P65: Leases and tenancy agreements
P67: Unless the property is expressly assigned subject to a tenancy, the vendor must show that all leases registered on the title have expired. Oral (at a rack rent ad taking effect in possession) or written legal tenancies (at a rack rent) for a period of 3 years or less do not require to be registered and will bind a purchaser. Similarly, a purchaser of land subject to short term equitable tenancy – ie an agreement to grant a short term tenancy – will have constructive notice of it and will take subject to the tenancy: Hunt v Luck [1902] 1 Ch 428. 
P69: A purchaser should therefore visit the premises to check that he will get vacant possession.
P71: A purchaser might be entitled to sight of a surrender agreement to establish that the tenant has no further rights in the property (eg where lease prematurely determined): Ng Tim Yee v Kindbest Investment Ltd (unreported) HCMP 463/98 21/05/1999; yet cf Ip Fai Man v Lui Kit Man (unreported) HCA 13661/98, 16/02/2000 (vacant possession to be given; existence of tenancy agreement mere matter of conveyance since vendor had absolute right to evict tenant because he was an `in-house’ tenant).
P74: Mortgages and charges
P76: Where a mortgage or charge on the title has not been discharged or released, the title will be encumbered and, if the mortgage or charge contains a power of sale, rendered defeasible.
P78: The vendor must, therefore, show that all mortgages and charges registered against the title have been reassigned or discharged: see Trump Well International Ltd v Siu Fung Knitting Factory Co Ltd (unreported) HCMP 2408/1998, 07/01/1999  (owner entered into equitable mortgage over flat prior to completion of flat and after completion of flat he entered into an identical legal mortgage over the flat; deed of release entered into only in respect of first equitable mortgage and not second mortgage; held title defective; first mortgage had been discharged by operation of law (doctrine of merger) when second mortgage entered into; second mortgage remained undischarged).
P80: This is the case even where the mortgage is registered only in the deeds pending registration section of the land register: Goldenwick Ltd v Standard Chartered bank (Hong Kong) Ltd [2008] 3 HKLRD 266
P83: Discharge or release of mortgages/charges
P85: Of course, mortgages and charges, whether in favour of individuals or companies, should be registered under the Land Registration Ordinance (Cap 128) or they will be void as against a bona fide purchaser or mortgagee in accordance with s 3(2) of the Ordinance. However, the mere vacation of a charge from the land register will not, however, operate as a discharge of the charge: see Siu Wing Yee Angeline v Earning Yield Ltd [2013] 6 HKC 281. To J held that the vacation of the registration of a charge only had the effect of removing its registration from the Land Register. It did not have the effect of extinguishing the interest in land created by the charge. The legal charge still existed, and it remained an encumbrance on the land. Without a valid release, the charge still encumbered the property. 
P87: There are three ways in which a legal mortgage or charge may be discharged or released. A legal mortgage or charge may be discharged by deed (s 4, Conveyancing and Property Ordinance) or by a receipt written on or annexed to the charge (s 56, Conveyancing and Property Ordinance).
P89: As to the form and contents of the receipt see Cheung Fuk Yu Danny v Vu Poi Van (unreported) DCCJ 2817/2013, 19/3/2015  (issue was whether a written receipt by way of the discharge of a charge had been properly executed by an agent of the mortgagee bank where no company chop had been affixed to the receipt nor had the receipt stated that the agent had been duly authorized to sign the receipt; Dty Judge A Kot held that section 23, CPO, which provided that `an instrument appearing to be duly executed shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, to have been duly executed’ was applicable to the present situation; there was nothing to show that the signatory had not been authorized to execute the receipt or that the receipt had not been validly executed notwithstanding the absence of any company chop; further, no action had been taken by the bank for many years to challenge its validity; the vendor had, accordingly, adequately answered the purchaser’s requisition).
P91: By contrast, an equitable mortgage or charge may be discharged or released in writing (s 5, Conveyancing and Property Ordinance).
P93: Discharge of wrong mortgage
P95: Clearly a properly executed discharge of the charge or mortgage will clear the charge or mortgage from the title. Where, however, the wrong mortgage is discharged, the title will remain encumbered, unless the error was simply a typing error: see Chan Shun v Ng Yiu Leung Danny (unreported) CACV 365/2008, 13/11/2009 (wrong memorial number given on discharge of mortgage; bank confirmed that mortgage had been effectively discharged by repayment; held that release ineffective and new release required from bank).
P97: Doctrine of `feeding the estoppel’: Cumberland Court (Brighton) v Taylor [1964] Ch 29; Cali Enterprises Ltd v Chongmark [1986] HKLR 816 (mortgage to be discharged by vendor post completion; once mortgage actually discharged, doctrine of feeding the estoppel operated retrospectively to give purchaser good title).
P99: How to get rid of `old’ mortgages
P101: S12A Conveyancing and Property Ordinance provides that, where land is subject to an encumbrance, and the encumbrancer is out of the jurisdiction, cannot be found or is unknown, or if it is uncertain who the encumbrancer is, the court may, on the application of the party for the time being entitled to redeem the encumbrance, direct or allow payment into court of a sum of money sufficient to redeem the encumbrance and any interest thereon. 
P103: An application under s12A comes in stages. The first stage is for the party ‘for the time being entitled to redeem the encumbrance’ to show that ‘the encumbrancer is out of the jurisdiction, cannot be found or is unknown, or if it is uncertain who the encumbrancer is’, and upon proof of that to seek direction or approval from the court to make a payment in. The court has the discretion to decide and direct whether notice should be given to the encumbrancer. If payment-in is approved and made, and the notice if directed given, the court may declare the land to be free from the encumbrance. The third stage may or may not come, which is the application by the encumbrancer (or any person entitled to the money in court) for payment out. See Re Cheung Chi Wang [2002] 1 HKC 326, which was followed in Ip Johnny Chong Ching v Ip Park Sing [2022] HKCFI 3743, Re Hau Hung [2022] HKCFI 3137 and Feign Larry v Wan Yung Hing [2023] HKCFI 1791. 
P105: Alternatively, one can make an application for a declaration that the ‘old’ mortgage was no longer subsisting and unenforceable by operation of the Limitation Ordinance. Lee Hung Cheong v William Tsokson [2023] HKCFI 872, the Court held that a 1961 mortgage was no longer subsisting and unenforceable by the operation of the Limitation Ordinance (Cap 347), following the cases of Fung Kam Cheung v Kwok Yiu Wing [1991] I HKC 321 and Yau Pak Hin & Anor v Ho Lung Thomas Ignatius (unreported) HCMP 628/2012, 31/07/2013.   
P108: As we have already seen in the last lecture, a legal mortgage or charge may be discharged by deed: s 4, Conveyancing and Property Ordinance or by a receipt written on or annexed to the charge: s 56, Conveyancing and Property Ordinance.
P110: An equitable mortgage or charge may be discharged or released in writing: s 5, Conveyancing and Property Ordinance. It has been held in Chun Tat Paper Co Ltd v Wong Ip Cheng [2013] 1 HKLRD 571, [2013] 2 HKC 236, CA, that an equitable mortgage or charge can be discharged or released de facto without any written discharge or release so that the title would no longer be encumbered by the equitable mortgage or charge; in this case there was no formal release of an equitable charge but the Court ruled that a discharge could be inferred from subsequent dealings and no complaints).
P114: Trusts
P116: The vendor must be prepared to show that any equitable interests in the property, whether registered or unregistered if unregistrable (eg resulting and constructive trusts), have ceased to bind the property. Of course, the purchaser may have constructive notice of them (so as not to be equity’s darling) and he should visit the premises to ensure that no occupiers may have an equitable interest in the property. 
P118: A breach of trust would render a title defective: see Faithway Enterprise Ltd v Lee Wan [2007] 4 HKC 55, CA (by way of a Deed of Trust made in 1984 Mrs Chan declared that certain property had been purchased by her as trustee for herself and two named children and covenanted that she would assign the property to the children as joint tenants when they attained their majority; later in 1984 the property was sold by Mrs Chan to another person; on further agreement to sell, purchaser raised requisition as to whether title good in view of the apparent breach of trust; held at first instance that any claim by children would probably be time-barred under the Limitation Ordinance and no real risk of assertion by children against the title; on appeal judgment reversed: held on appeal that a purchaser with notice of a prior breach of trust would himself be a constructive trustee so that the limitation period laid down in the Limitation Ordinance did not apply so real risk against title).
P122: Deed of Gift (送契樓)
P124: A gift in the chain of title may give rise to title problems for several reasons.
P126: A gift might give rise to a resulting or constructive trust in favour of the donor: see Osman Mohammed Arab v Lam Ying Lung Alan (unreported) HCA 653/2011, 29/07/2016 (a rebuttable presumption of a resulting trust arises where a person voluntarily transfers property to another for no consideration).
P128: The title might have been rendered defeasible if the property had been assigned to a person by way of (i) a fraudulent conveyance under s 60 of Conveyancing and Property Ordinance, (ii) a transaction at an undervalue by a person subsequently adjudged bankrupt within 5 years under s 49(1) of the Bankruptcy Ordinance or (iii) an unfair preference by a person subsequently adjudged bankrupt under s 50 of the Bankruptcy Ordinance: see Osman Mohammed Arab v Lam Ying Lung Alan (unreported) HCA 653/2011 29/07/2016; or (iii) unfair preference by insolvent company under s.266 Companies Ordinance. 
P130: Finally, it should also be borne in mind that the statutory conclusive presumptions in ss 5(4)(a) and (b) of the Powers of Attorney Ordinance do not operate in favour of donees but only in favour of purchasers.
P132: There may also be implications under the Estate Duty Ordinance (3 years before death of donor) (abolished in 2005).
P135: Rights of way
P137: A right of way over the property which is the subject matter of the sale (so that the property is the servient tenement) will constitute an encumbrance on the title.  
P139: Of course, if the easement has been abandoned and has ceased to affect the property, it will no longer constitute an encumbrance. Such was the case, for example, in Ho Ching Group Ltd v Tsang Pui Lin [2014] 2 HKLRD 249, CA, where the Court of Appeal, agreeing with the judgment at first instance, held that a right of way by way of an internal staircase to a cockloft had been abandoned and had, therefore, ceased to affect the property.
P142: Charging orders and lites pendentes
P144: Charging orders by way of enforcement of a civil judgment
P146: A charging order will constitute an encumbrance on title: Chief Access Ltd v Lau Kwong Wing (unreported) HCA 892/2011, 24/07/2012. Where a charging order has been registered over property in the Land Registry, the vendor must produce evidence of its discharge under s 20B(4) High Court Ordinance. 
P148: The registration of a charging order will lapse after 5 years since its registration: s 17 Land Registration Ordinance: see Ocean Rich Investment Co Ltd v Leung Yiu Biu (unreported) HCMP 1903/1998, 06/05/1999 but it may be renewed. 
P150: Of course, the provision in section 17 of the Land Registration Ordinance which provides that a charging order will have no effect after 5 years unless re-registered only affects priority vis-a vis subsequently registered interests and the charging order itself is not invalidated and the underlying debt still remains: see Si Tou Choi Kam v Wealth Credit Ltd [2017] 1 HKLRD 1074, DCt (see also CA judgment, it was held that the holder of the CO is not a ‘purchaser’ so not a ‘purchaser for value’ within s.3(2) LRO : Si Tou Choi Kam v Wealth Credit Ltd [2018] 4 HKC 247).
P152: So for expired charging orders: see Hung Heung Keng v Challenge Way Investment (unreported) HCMP 789/2006, 14/06/2006 (prohibitory order dated 1950 registered against title; held that prohibitory order had same effect as a charging order and had ceased to have effect after 5 years; vendor had shown a good title). See also Wong Chung Keung v Cheung Yik Tung [2018] HKCFI 2722: under s.3(2) LRO expired old CO remains to be void against ‘subsequent’ purchasers whose interests are registered between CO’s expiry and re-registration. For this reason, a vendor of property can show good title even if there are expired charging orders registered against the property which are liable to be vacated.
P155: Lis pendens
P157: A lis pendens will include a writ/originating summons in an action relating to land and a judgment affecting land.
P159: A personal action against a defendant unrelated to land cannot, however, be registered as a lis pendens: see, eg, Shing Shu Lung v Shing Kam Chuen (unreported) HCA 2067/2013, 07/07/2017 (plaintiff issued writ against defendant claiming damages for breach of trust, an order for an account and an order restraining the defendant from selling lands which he held as trustee; lis pendens registered against the defendant’s land; on application by the defendant that the lis pendens be vacated,  Dty Judge Kenneth Kwok SC ruled that all three heads of claim were personal claims which did not affect land and ordered the lis pendens be vacated).
P161: An illustration of a lis pendens is Nanyang Finance Co Ltd v Chan Kwok Wing [2004] 1 HKLRD 869, CA, where the Court of Appeal held that a Form 8 Notice, issued under the Matrimonial Causes Ordinance and registered against property owned by a husband, under which a wife in divorce proceedings claimed maintenance pending suit, periodical payments, a lump sum order and a settlement property order constituted the assertion of a proprietary claim against the husband’s property and constituted a blot on his title. 
P163: See also Sun Ngai International Investment Ltd v Zhang Suhau [2009] 1 HKLRD 48  (application for ancillary matrimonial relief in respect of property could be registered as lis pendens). Also see Wide Power Corp Ltd v IO of Manhattan Court [2015] 5 HKC 269 – an injunction for removal of unauthorised structures erected in breach of the DMC was held not to be an interest in land.
P164:  
P165: Similarly, a lis pendens whereby a purchaser claims to hold a lien over property on the grounds that he had paid the whole or part of the purchase price for the property under an aborted sale and purchase agreement (a purchaser’s lien) will constitute an encumbrance on the title rendering the title defeasible: Liu Chi Keung v Law Sim Yuk [2006] 4 HKLRD 385. 
P167: A lis pendens also expires after 5 years unless renewed: see s 17 Land Registration Ordinance.
P169: The court has jurisdiction to award damages for the malicious registration of a lis pendens: Fung Kan Wai v Leung Shui Fat [1999] 4 HKC 70, CA; Tai Yip Dyeing Factory Ltd v Kong Hoi Sang [2007] 1 HKLRD 608.
P172: Effect of foreign judgment or order
P174: What is the effect of a foreign judgment on the vendor’s title where it relates to the vendor’s land? A foreign judgment or order affecting land in Hong Kong cannot be registered under the Foreign Judgments (Reciprocal Enforcement) Ordinance (cap 319) since only money judgments can be so registered; nor can it be registered as a lis pendens in the Land Registry since only judgments or orders of Hong Kong courts can be so registered; nonetheless a real risk of an action being brought in Hong Kong to enforce the interest claimed might render the vendor’s title defective: see Cova Enterprises Ltd v Tjanaka [2004] 1 HKLRD 199 (order of Singapore court rendered title defective).
P177: Sale and purchase agreements registered against the title which have not been vacated (`hanging sale and purchase agreements’)
P179: A prior sale and purchase agreement registered against the title where the transaction has not been completed by an assignment will prima facie constitute an encumbrance on the title. This is because the equitable interest will have passed under the specifically enforceable sale and purchase agreement to the intending purchaser. 
P181: This means that, where there is a registered sale and purchase agreements on the register which has not been vacated, the vendor must establish that it no longer affects the title: see Guang Xin Enterprises Ltd v Leung Kwai Mui (unreported) HCMP 2024/1996, 15/07/1996 (prior purchaser had already recovered damages for breach of contract so no risk of assertion against purchaser’s title); Hansun Investment Ltd v Sincere Union Development Ltd [2008] 4 HKLRD 442, [2008] 4 HKC 351 (purchaser under previous sale and purchase agreement that remained registered on title had accepted the vendor’s repudiatory breach by calling for the return of the deposit; since he had elected to accept the repudiatory breach and discharge himself from further performance, court would order vacation of previous sale and purchase agreement and vendor’s title not affected).
P183: This principle will apply equally to sale and purchase agreements in the Deeds Pending Registration Section of the Register: see Kong King Ong Alexander v Kan Heung Wing [2013] 1 HKLRD 1136
P186: Orders or notices from the Government, Building Authority or other Govt Authorities
P188: Orders or notices from the Government or Building Authority may render the title defeasible provided that the burden of compliance is so substantial as to fall outside the reasonable contemplation of the purchaser. Where order registered against the title and owner has complied he should ensure that he obtains and registers a letter of compliance: Heung Sui Kei v Benefit Charter Ltd [1999] 3 HKC 543 (only partial letter of compliance); Modern Sino Ltd v Art Fair Co Ltd [1999] 3 HKLRD 847 (temporary withdrawal of demolition order not compliance).
P190: Resumption orders and remedial, demolition and repairing orders 
P192: If the property is subject to a notice such as a resumption notice under the Lands Resumption Ordinance or a remedial, closure or demolition order under the Buildings Ordinance the property will be encumbered provided that the encumbrance is of such a magnitude that it would exceed anything that a reasonable purchaser would have in contemplation when agreeing to purchase the property. The co-owners’ titles would be rendered defeasible because, if they do not comply with the order, the Building Authority may carry out the necessary work and send the bill to the co-owners. If they fail to pay, a charge (with a power of sale) may be imposed on the entire property: see s 32A and 33, Buildings Ordinance.  
P194: See, for example, Lam Mee Hing v Chiang Shu Yin [1995] 3 HKC 247 (remedial order in respect of dangerous slopes); Wah Ying Properties v Sound Cash Ltd [1994] 1 HKC 786 (remedial notice in respect of retaining wall); All Ports Holdings Ltd v Grandfix Ltd [2001] 2 HKLRD 630, CA  (repairing order under s 26, Buildings Ordinance; such an order would only encumber the vendor’s title if it were of such a wholly exceptional nature and called for wholly exceptional measures well outside the ordinary ‘wear and tear’ remedies that common owners of Hong Kong buildings had to meet from time to time). In Hu Mei Yu v. King Best (unreported) HCA 9317/1998, 10/07/2000, it was held that s.33(8) BO concerned the quantum of the building order, while the subject s.27 BO order concerned liability (also obligation to repair slope under government orders, held that it is doubtful whether an undertaking to comply would suffice).
P196: Warning Notices
P198: Note section 24C of the Buildings Ordinance  whereby the Building Authority may issue a notice in writing warning the owners of property that unauthorised building works have been carried out and requiring them to be demolished by a certain date; if such demolition is not carried out, the notice will be registered in the Land Registry which will render the owner’s title defeasible provided the liability is of such a magnitude that it would exceed anything that a reasonable purchaser would have in contemplation when agreeing to purchase the property: see Chi Kit Co Ltd v Lucky Health International Enterprise Ltd [2000] 2 HKLRD 503.
P200: Non-mandatory notices
P202: A notice merely suggesting (rather than mandating) that measures be taken to rectify unauthorised building works might not render the title defective in the absence of any requirement by the government or Building Authority to undertake remedial measures: Polyset Ltd v Panhandat Ltd (2002) 5 HKCFAR 234, CFA.
P205: Linkeage clauses (double defeasibility)
P207: There is commonly a term in Government leases/Conditions of Grant that the developer/owner must comply with all building regulations laid down in the Buildings Ordinance and regulations made thereunder. In such a case the construction of unauthorised structural building works would render the title defeasible also through breach of the Government lease/Conditions of Grant. See Giant River Ltd v Asie Marketing Ltd [1990] 1 HKLR 297 (extra subterranean floors built in detached house constituted breach and title defeasible). 
P211: Unauthorized Building Works / Illegal Structures 
P214: Even before any enforcement action is taken, a title might also be rendered defeasible where there is a real risk that the Building Authority might take enforcement action for breach of the Buildings Ordinance or regulations made thereunder. 
P216: Building initially constructed
P218: An owner’s title may be rendered defeasible where a building has been constructed in a manner which has failed to comply with the Buildings Ordinance or the Building Regulations: see Luk Kwan Hung v Victory Mark Investment Ltd [2003] 3 HKLRD 919 (roof constructed too low in breach of Building Regulations; title potentially defeasible and vendor could not pass good title). 
P220: (ii) Subsequent unauthorised building works
P222: An owner’s title may also be rendered defeasible where unauthorised building works have been carried out subsequently. According to s 14, Buildings Ordinance, no person shall commence building works without first having obtained approval from the Building Authority (save for minor building works: s 14AA, Buildings Ordinance). The owner’s title may, therefore, be rendered defeasible where unauthorised building works have been carried out without prior approval from the BA even though no remedial or demolition notice has been issued (the `ticking bomb’ situation). 
P224: (iii) Meaning of `building works’
P226: `Building works’ are defined in section 2(1) of the Buildings Ordinance as including any kind of building construction, site formation works, ground investigation in the scheduled areas, foundation works, repairs, demolition, alteration, addition and every kind of building operation, including drainage works.
P228: It has been held in HKSAR v Gemsland Hotels Ltd  [2017] 2 HKLRD 393 that the affixing of a signboard to an external wall of a building constituted `building works’ within the definition of `building works’ in s 2 of the Buildings Ordinance since it constituted an `addition’ to a building. See also HKSAR v. Poon Lok To Otto [2019] HKMagC 3 (at [15]-[16], [46]-[40]for a more general description of factors which are relevant to the consideration of ‘building works’.
P230: Whether the building works render the owner’s title defeasible
P232: To determine whether the unauthorised building works render the owner’s title defeasible several issues must be considered in the appropriate order:
P234: Are the building works in or on the building? 
P235: If the building works are `in’ in the building, are the building works exempted under s 41(3), Buildings Ordinance; are they structural and form an integral part of the building? 
P236: If the building works are not exempted, because they are not in the building eg on the roof or because they are of a structural nature, is there a real risk of enforcement action being taken?
P238: The Court of Final Appeal in Mariner International Hotels Ltd v Atlas Ltd (2007) 10 HKCFAR 1  concerned concrete plinths and gondola posts constructed on the roof of building, and considered whether they `involved the structure of the building. Bokhary PJ said that, to be exempted under s.41(3) BO, the building works had both to be in the building and of a non-structural nature. As regards the issue whether building works on the roof of a building were `in the building’, the lower courts had concluded that the building works on the roof were `inside the building’; the legislation had to be construed purposively and to widen the exemption would reduce the scope of scrutiny of the Building Authority; there was a purposive difference relevant to safety between building works protected from the elements by being `in’ a building and building works exposed to the elements on the roof of a building. It was held that the proper construction of the provision was that building works on the roof of a building were not `in’ the building and, therefore, fell outside the exemption; if this conclusion was wrong and the building works in the instant case were in the building, were they non-structural? The learned judge briefly concluded that, since the concrete plinths and gondola posts `involved the structure of the building and were integral to the building’, they were outside the meaning of ‘non-structural’. 
P240: See Ronald Wilson v Appeal Tribunal (Buildings) [2013] 5 HKLRD 158 (bay windows are not in the building and could not be exempted building works).
P242: In some cases the courts have asked whether the works basically involve construction which significantly undermines the load-bearing propensities of the building: see eg MTR Corpn Ltd v Hwang Xiao Yun Sherry (unreported) LDBM 109/2002, 06/11/2002 (heavy concrete room constructed on roof was illegal structure). 
P244: Internal partitioning to create sub-divided flats may or may not constitute structural building works. It will if it involves changes to the drainage system and/or the creation of a new entrance: see Lucky Success (HK) Ltd v Ko Ni Kwong [2010] 1 HKC 351 (to make the two units self-sufficient, both units had to have separate entrances, a kitchen, a bathroom and a toilet; it must have been necessary to put in a new kitchen and toilet and changes or additions to the drainage system would have been required); Asia Way International Investments Ltd v Hung Kin Ping (unreported) DCCJ 3911/2011, 13/05/2013 (new drainage system and new entrance would have been required).
P246: As we have seen in LG2, a prohibition on making structural alterations may perhaps be construed more liberally (ie more widely) if included in a deed of mutual covenant than when imposed by the Buildings Ordinance: Incorporated Owners of Elite Garden v Profit More Co Ltd [2002] 2 HKLRD 518, but the prohibition will not extend to non-load bearing internal partition walls; Tam Sze Man v IO Shan Tsui Court [2011] 5 HKLRD 434, CA. For DMC breaches and good title, see below.
P249: Is there a real risk of enforcement action?
P251: Where the Building Authority discovers an unauthorised structure, the following sequence of events might follow: (i) issue of removal (demolition) or remedial order; (ii) if no compliance, BA might carry out the necessary building works itself and send bill to owner; (iii) if bill not paid, charging order registered over flat; and (iv) if bill still not paid, flat sold to defray cost: see s 33, Buildings Ordinance.
P253: The question for the parties and perhaps ultimately the court is whether there is a real risk that the Building Authority will take the above enforcement action by issuing a removal or remedial order under the Buildings Ordinance and, if the work required to be carried out in the notice is ignored, carrying out the necessary works itself and imposing a charge on the title to the property: Kok Chong Ho v Double Value Developments Ltd (unreported) HCMP 2857/1990, 19/12/1990 (no real risk) (reversed on appeal [1993] 2 HKLR 423, CA on other grounds). This charge gives the Building Authority the power to sell the property to recoup its charges and costs (hence the title is potentially defeasible since the owner can be deprived of it).
P255: For an illustration of the application of the `real risk’ test see Jumbo Gold Investment Ltd v Warren Yuen Cheong Leung (2000) 3 HKCFAR 52, CFA (height restricted to 35ft in Crown lease but height breached; Government had taken no action for many years; when vendor came to sell to purchaser, purchaser raised requisition as to whether vendor had shown good title; held by Court of Final Appeal that vendor had shown good title since no real risk of enforcement by Government); Homyip Development Ltd v Chu Kang Ming Trade Development Co Ltd [1995] 2 HKC 458 (false ceiling converting house from two to three storeys; title defeasible). 
P257: Godfrey JA has clarified (and perhaps made more strict) the `real risk test’ in relation to unauthorised structures in Spark Rich (China) Ltd v Valrose Ltd [2006] 2 HKC 589, CA, where he said:
P259: “So the test may be usefully framed as follows: If the purchaser asks his solicitor `Can I be sure that I can safely disregard the risk?’, then, unless his solicitor (being a prudent and experienced solicitor) can properly advise him that he can, the purchaser cannot be obliged to accept the vendor’s title even if supplied with opinion evidence to the effect that action by the Building Authority was unlikely.”
P261: The learned judge concluded ominously that cases in which a purchaser of property might safely be advised that he could safely disregard unauthorised building works were likely to be rare.
P263: See also Link Harvest Ltd v Wayhang Development Ltd [2001] 2 HKC 652  (mountain lodge built before 1972 but no occupation permit issued; held risk of enforcement action so title defective); Chinawell Management Ltd v Strong Huge Corporation Ltd [2012] 1 HKLRD 79  (add-on squatter extension to house gave rise to real risk of enforcement action by Building Authority).
P265: It can be said that the Court may be less persuaded that there is a real risk if the UBW is prevalent in the district or particular type of property. This can be seen in A. Chow J’s (as he then was) decision in  Join Union Investments v. China Tree [2016] 2 HKLRD 901. He held that the cocklofts (i.e. the UBW) in G/F shops in old districts would not be a type of breach that goes to ‘root of title’ (i.e. amount to repudiatory breach): 
P267: “…The existence of unauthorised building works in retail premises, especially in the older districts in Hong Kong, is common place and does not appear to have any significant impact on their market or capital values. These properties change hands frequently like ordinary commercial commodities, as demonstrated in the present case by the fact that the defendant (through Madam Chan) purchased the Property in September 2010 and sold it to the plaintiff (through Madam Shiu) in March 2011 for a handsome profit. It is contrary to market reality to treat the existence of an unauthorised cockloft, even of a substantial size like the present one, as constituting a title defect going to the root of title. The worst that could happen in the present case, it seems to me, would be an order by the Building Authority requiring the Cockloft to be demolished. The practical consequence of such an order, however, would not be any different from that achieved by the 2010 Building Order. Under that order, those parts of the Building affected by the building works complained of by the Building Authority, namely, the door opening formed in the staircase enclosure wall between the ground floor and first floor of the Building, which provides the only means of access to the Cockloft, have to be reinstated in accordance with the approved building plans. In either case, the Cockloft could not be used.” (NOTE: The rider of the Supplemental Agreement referring to the existing Building Order was waived for HKD 20,000)
P270: Guidance Notices from the Building Authority
P272: The Building Authority periodically issues guidance notices on their priority of taking enforcement action; these guidance notices will not give rise to a legitimate expectation that no enforcement action will be taken in respect of building works classified as low risk: Tsui Koon Tin v Building Authority (unreported) CACV 354/2002, 24/5/2006
P275: Do unauthorised building works in relation to one flat in a multi-storey building affect the titles of the co-owners of the other flats in the building?
P278: Where the notice or unauthorised building works relate to one flat alone, only the title of that particular flat will be affected and the title of other flats in a multi-storey building will remain unaffected: Active Keen Industries Ltd v Fok Chi Keong [1994] 1 HKLR 396, CA; Hong Kong Central Hospital Ltd v Progressive Group Ltd [2008] 1 HKC 134 (purchaser agreed to purchase flat in a multi-storey building; the occupation permit for the building indicated that there were 3 flats on the relevant floor, but the Approved Building Plan and deed of mutual covenant showed 4 flats on the floor; there were, in fact, only 3 flats on the floor because two flats on the floor (not involving the purchaser’s flat) had been combined; held first that the vendor’s title was not defective since the Building Authority must have taken the view that non-compliance did not affect the structure of the building; further no enforcement action had been taken for more than 30 years; even if there was a breach of the Buildings Ordinance and occupation permit, the building works did not affect the purchaser’s flat, applying Active Keen Industries Ltd v Fok Chi Keong [1994] 1 HKLR 396, CA). 
P280: Where, however, the notice relates to the common parts of a multi-storey building, the title of all the flats in the block may be affected, provided the extent of the repairing obligation is beyond the reasonable expectation of a purchaser: see Lam Mee Hing v Chiang Shu Yin [1995] 3 HKC 247  (slopes) and Wah Ying Properties Ltd v Sound Cash Ltd [1994] 1 HKC 78  (above) (retaining wall).
P283: Criminal offences
P285: Under s 40(1AA) of the Buildings Ordinance it is a criminal offence for any person knowingly to commence or carry out building works without the approval of the Building Authority.  It is also a criminal offence under section 40(1BA) of the Ordinance to fail to comply with an order (such as a demolition or removal order) given by the Building Authority.
P288: Removal of unauthorised structure prior to completion
P290: Will it be a sufficient answer to a requisition as to the existence of an unauthorised structure that the vendor agrees to remove the offending structure prior to completion? Will such demolition prevent the purchaser from having the right to rescind the agreement? The answer would seem to depend upon a construction of the terms of the sale and purchase agreement. In the absence of express agreement otherwise the vendor has a duty to give good title at completion. As a general principle, therefore, it would be sufficient, by way of fulfilling his duty to give good title, for the vendor to demolish any unauthorised structures prior to completion. This principle should, however, be applied with caution as the vendor might have agreed, either expressly or by implication, to pass good title in the unauthorised structure to the purchaser. 
P292: The test to be applied is whether, if the unauthorised building works are removed prior to completion, the purchaser will be receiving substantially what he contracted to purchase (ie the doctrine of substantial performance). If, once the unauthorised building works are removed, the purchaser will not be receiving at completion substantially what he contracted to purchase, the building works cannot be removed prior to completion and, if the unauthorised building works are removed, the vendor will not be able to compel the purchaser to accept the title by way of an application for specific performance.
P294: No substantial performance of S&P (major ubws). There are several case illustrations where the courts have ruled that the vendor would not be giving the purchaser substantially what he contracted to receive at completion. See Max Smart Ltd v First Super Investment Ltd [1999] 1 HKLRD 519 (vendor agreed to sell a shop to the purchaser on an `as is’ basis. An unauthorised cockloft of substantial dimensions had been erected in the premises and, when the purchaser raised a requisition thereon, the vendor agreed to demolish the cockloft. Yam J held that, since the vendor had agreed to sell the premises on an `as is’ basis, the vendor could not compel the purchaser to accept the premises after demolition of the unauthorised cockloft). A similar conclusion on the facts was reached by Waung J in Sun Great International Ltd v Hui Lai Ying Polly (unreported) HCA 10742/1994, 29/08/1996 (vendor agreed to sell property to the purchaser the property containing, as the court found, three unauthorised structures comprising an addition to an upper balcony, a skylight and the courtyard. The vendor offered to demolish the illegal structures prior to completion, but the purchaser rescinded and demanded the return of his deposit; held there was no basis on which the court could hold that the defects in the title were capable of being successfully removed prior to completion. Even if they could be so removed, the plaintiff would no longer be receiving what it had bargained to accept. See also Grandco (Holdings) Ltd v Harbour Wealth Co Ltd (unreported) HCA 3388/1998, 6th April 20000 (sloping garden had been rebuilt without building permission to render it flat; vendor reinstated sloping garden prior to completion; held substantial difference between sloping and flat garden and no substantial performance); Cashew Holdings Ltd v Pacific Success Enterprise Ltd [2004] 2 HKC 594 (enclosure of pump room to make extra bedroom; in determining whether substantial performance, court should look at size of affected area together with difference in value to purchaser and effect of removal of illegal structure on sale prospects).
P296: Substantial performance of S&P (minor ubws). By contrast there are several case illustrations where the courts have ruled that the vendor would be giving the purchaser substantially what he contracted to receive at completion. See Summit Link Ltd v Sunlink Group (Hong Kong) Co Ltd [2000] 2 HKLRD 724, CA; and Homyip Investment Ltd v Chu Kang Ming Trade Development Co Ltd [1995] 2 HKC 458 (court said that the removal of an unauthorised staircase did not have the effect of substantially depriving the purchaser of the benefit under the sale and purchase agreement). A similar conclusion was reached by Yuen J in Goldful Way Development Ltd v Wellstable Development Ltd [1998] 4 HKC 679 (defendant had agreed to sell property which included an enclosed yard which the court concluded was an unauthorised structure. The vendor argued that good title would be given if he demolished the unauthorised enclosure prior to completion as he would still be able to substantially perform the agreement. The learned judge agreed holding that it was a matter of degree in each case whether the deficiency in what was agreed to be conveyed was material. In this case, although the unauthorised enclosure would reduce the internal floor area slightly, it was otherwise of immaterial significance for the enjoyment of the rest of the property).
P298: As to the position where the vendor, in response to a requisition, offers to demolish the unauthorised structure and, the purchaser having failed to respond, proceeds to demolish the structure see Victory Star Ltd v Ng Fung Ying [2003] 4 HKC 677, [2004] 2 HKLRD 518, CA (there was an arguable case that purchaser under duty to respond which might estop the purchaser from relying upon vendor’s failure to give substantial performance).
P300: Unauthorised building works reported by intending purchaser
P302: See Chan Choi Fung v Huge Base Investment Ltd [2010] 3 HKC 491, [2010] 2 HKLRD 316, CA (where an intending purchaser reports an allegedly unauthorized structure on property he has contracted to purchase to the Building Authority, he cannot subsequently complain if the vendor demolishes the unauthorized structure prior to completion). 
P304: Approval may be required for the demolition of unauthorized building works
P306: Note that approval of demolition/repairing plans may be required from the Building Authority: see Re Profit Success Development Ltd (unreported) CACV 87/2014, 22/12/2014 (Cheung CJHC held that a section 24 demolition order was not immune from the requirements of s 14 of the Buildings Ordinance (`the Ordinance’) requiring approval of the building (demolition) plans by the Building Authority; however, whilst it had to depend on the facts in each case, the building order itself would normally constitute the necessary consent by the Building Authority to the commencement of the work ordered to be done under the building (demolition) order insofar as such work fell within the scope of section 14 of the Ordinance; if such work did fall within the scope of section 14 of the Ordinance and was not covered by any plans already approved under that section, plans had to be submitted under section 14 of the Ordinance for approval).
P308: Sale ‘as is’
P310: As we have seen above, where there is a term in the sale and purchase agreement that sale shall be on an ‘as is’ basis, this only refers to the physical condition of the property and does not serve as an exclusion clause covering unauthorised building works: All Ports Holdings Ltd v Grandfix Ltd [2001] 2 HKLRD 630, CA; Cashew Holdings Ltd v Pacific Success Enterprise Ltd [2004] 2 HKC 594 (`as is’ clause only to protect vendor and did not give any right that could be asserted to restrain a vendor from demolishing unauthorised building works).
P313: Potential Liability from Incorporated Owners/Co-owners/Building Manager
P315: As regards liability for unpaid management fees, authority can be found in AIE Co Ltd v Kay Kam Yu [1996] 1 HKC 239, CA, where the Court of Appeal held that a memorandum of outstanding management fees constituted an encumbrance upon the property. See also Wise Wave Investments Ltd v TKF Services Ltd [2007] 4 HKLRD 762. But remember that the sum unpaid must be outside the contemplation of a reasonable purchaser.
P317: The title of the vendor might be rendered defective and at times defeasible if there has been a relevant breach of a term in the deed of mutual covenant in respect of the vendor’s property. Not all breaches of the deed of mutual covenant will have this effect: Lo Chi Wai Arthur v Liu Wing Cheung Wilfred (unreported) HCA 11459/1982, 23/12/1983 (car park sold separately from flat in breach of DMC; when flat came to be sold title held defeasible since real risk of action by other parties to DMC); Dragon Top Investments Ltd v Able HK Holdings Ltd (unreported) DCCJ 824/2013, 23/10/2013 (vendor had agreed to sell its car parking space separately from any residential unit in breach of a prohibition in the deed of mutual covenant; Dty Judge SP Yip concluded that the vendor had failed to answer the requisition adequately and had, accordingly, failed to show good title); Modern Sino Ltd v Art Fair Co Ltd [1999] HKLRD 847 (carrying out nauthorized building works held to constitute a breach of the deed of mutual covenant rendering the vendor’s title defective). 
P319: Breaches in respect of which there is a real risk of significant enforcement action being taken by the Incorporated Owners or manager, for example by imposing a charge on the owner’s property to enforce compliance, would likely be render title defective. Possible breaches are, of course, many and variable. For example, the owner may fail to pay management fees, may carry out nauthorized building works, may fail to maintain his unit properly or may agree to sell his car park separately from his unit where such is prohibited by the deed of mutual covenant. Liability under a deed of mutual covenant upon a purchaser to pay or contribute to unpaid bills for building repairs or unpaid management fees imposed by the IO or manager of the multi-storey building (ie not by Government), which are of an extent beyond a reasonable purchaser’s expectation, is likely to constitute an encumbrance on the vendor’s title: Luk Ho Chang v Fook Man Finance Co Ltd [2006] 2 HKLRD 489, [2006] 2 HKC 207 (the plaintiff agreed to purchase a flat in Kowloon; vendor warranted that, if it was discovered that any resolution of the incorporated owners for repairs existed prior to the date of the agreement, the vendor would pay the costs of those repairs; owners’ corporation had already resolved at an owners’ meeting to replace the lifts and carry out other major repairs to the building; decision to carry out these repairs was subsequently followed up by the management committee and contractors appointed to carry out the work; purchaser contended that the vendor was liable as agreed for these costs and maintained that he would complete only if the estimated repair costs were paid to the vendor’s solicitor as stakeholder prior to completion; vendor refused and purported to terminate the agreement; purchaser then sought a declaration from the court that the vendor was liable for the costs of the repairs; Deputy Judge Muttrie held first that the effect of s 14(1) of the Building Management Ordinance was that, once the corporation had resolved to carry out the repairs to the common parts of the building, that resolution was binding upon all the owners; vendor was, therefore, liable for the cost of the repairs since the resolution committing the co-owners to carry out the repairs had been passed before the date of the sale and purchase agreement; further, if there was any outstanding liability to pay for repairs at completion, the owners’ corporation would be able to recover the costs from the owner of the flat from time to time; this liability would, therefore, constitute an encumbrance on the vendor’s title which the purchaser was entitled to have removed before completion)
P321: A title will not be defective merely because of some personal action against the vendor which might in the future lead, by way of execution against the property, to the imposition of a charging order upon the property agreed to be sold. 
P323: The position is different, however, where an action unrelated to land lies against an Owner’s Corporation since, according to s 17(1)(b) of the Building Management Ordinance (`the BMO’) the judgment creditor is entitled to apply to the Lands Tribunal for leave to enforce the judgment against any co-owner of the building: Lucky Health International Enterprise Ltd v Chi Kit Co Ltd [2000] 2 HKLRD 503, [2000] 3 HKC 143, CFA (the `scaffolding case’) (purchaser agreed to buy vendor’s flat; then discovered that personal injuries action had been commenced against the incorporated owners of the building for more than $20 million. Purchaser claimed vendor’s title defective because under s 17(1)(b) of the BMO judgment creditor could apply for leave of court to enforce judgment against any individual owner of flat in building; held vendor’s title defective since liability to contribute to an expense of such magnitude was not within reasonable contemplation of purchaser). 
P325: See Kan Yui Man Allen v Ng Hiu Nam (unreported) DCMP 174/2011, 14/10/2011 (purchaser, after entering into a sale and purchase agreement with the vendor, discovered that an action had been commenced against the Incorporated Owners of the building in which he had agreed to purchase the flat; no mention of this pending action had been made by the vendor, nor had the purchaser been informed as to the extent of the damages claimed or the progress of the action; he raised a requisition to which the vendor replied that the purchaser had agreed to purchase the flat subject to the pending action; Dty Judge To, after considering the decision of the Court of Final Appeal in Chi Kit Co Ltd v Lucky Health International Enterprise Ltd [2000] 2 HKLRD 503, CFA, concluded that the vendor had not answered the purchaser’s requisition with candour; he had failed to provide information as to the particulars of the action, the stage of the proceedings or the amount of the claim to enable the purchaser to assess the magnitude of the risk of any judgment against the Incorporated Owners being enforced against the purchaser; the vendor had, therefore, failed to show good title).
P327: See also Gigabillion Asia Pacific Ltd v Sino Dynamic International Ltd [2015] 2 HKC 384, [2015] 2 HKLRD 100, CA (several actions commenced against incorporated owners; only costs outstanding; Cheung CJHC first observed that a substantial liability to contribute to the eventual orders for costs could affect the owner’s title in three ways; first, it could lead to the Owners Corporation registering a charge against the owner’s property under the deed of mutual covenant; secondly, the execution creditor could, if the Incorporated Owners failed to discharge the liability, commence execution proceedings against the owner; and thirdly, if the Incorporated Owners became insolvent, the owner would become liable to contribute to funds to discharge the Incorporated Owners’ debts and liabilities; unless the risk of such eventualities was merely fanciful or unreal, the presence of such a risk would constitute a blot on the vendor’s title, thereby entitling an unwilling purchaser to refuse to complete; in the instant case the three sets of litigation involved, when viewed as a whole, could not be regarded as an ordinary incident of building management such that a reasonable purchaser might be expected to have in contemplation; there were three different sets of litigation which certainly could not be termed a common occurrence in building management; secondly, the requisition had not been satisfactorily answered since the vendor had failed to give any indication, even a rough one, as to the magnitude of the actual and potential exposure to the costs; without such a figure, it would be impossible for an intending purchaser to evaluate whether the potential liability was real or fanciful; finally, without any realistic idea as to the extent of the potential liability, the offer of $25,000 together with an offer of an indemnity did not solve the problem since the purchaser had no way of confirming whether that sum was sufficient to meet the potential liability; the vendor had failed to answer the requisition satisfactorily and had failed to prove its title).
P329: A similar issue arose in Lo Yee Man v Si Chuan Property Development Consultants Ltd (unreported) DCMP 478/2014, 08/05/2014 (in this case the purchaser raised a requisition as to whether there was a tortious claim against the Incorporated Owners of a building containing a shop in Yuen Long which it had agreed to purchase; in fact there was a personal injuries claim filed against the Incorporated Owners; the defendant first maintained that such was irrelevant but on the day of completion offered to pay the sum of $50,000 to their solicitors as stakeholders to defray any such claim; the purchaser refused to complete and the vendor forfeited the purchaser’s deposit; Dty Judge CK Siu first noted that in Chi Kit Co Ltd v Lucky Health International Enterprise Ltd (2003) HKCFAR 268 the Court of Final Appeal had ruled that such a claim could be enforced against the owner for the time being of a unit in the building with the leave of the Lands Tribunal; the vendor had failed to provide information about the magnitude of the claim and the vendor’s offer to stakehold $50,000 did not eliminate any risk of a demand being made by the Incorporated Owners beyond the sum to be stakeheld; without knowing the amount of the claim, there was a risk that the plaintiff could enforce any judgment against all the individual owners of units in the building including the purchaser; such a potential liability constituted a blot on the vendor’s title; the vendor had, accordingly failed to show good title a reasonable time before completion and the vendor had wrongly repudiated the sale and purchase agreement). 
P331: A solicitor acting for a purchaser should, therefore, by way of investigating his client’s title, check to ensure that there is no pending litigation affecting the Owners’ Corporation (if there is one) of the building in which his client is intending to purchase a unit. If there is, he must raise a requisition to identify the extent of the claim and decide whether any such claim is of such magnitude as to render the vendor’s title defective. From the point of view of a vendor who is aware of such litigation before his client has bound himself to sell the unit, he should insert an appropriate exclusion clause into the sale and purchase agreement. He must also, of course, answer any requisition raised by the purchaser with full candour to avoid the purchaser being entitled to rescind the agreement on the basis of the vendor’s failure to show good title.
P334: Nominations
P336: An encumbrance might also arise by way of a resulting trust in the context of nominations.
P338: Presumption of resulting trust
P340: A nomination arises where a purchaser (the nominator) provides the purchase money for property but nominates another person (the nominee) into whose name the property should be assigned. The consequence may be that the nominee, having given no consideration, holds the property by way of resulting trust for the nominator. 
P342: If the nominee subsequently enters into an agreement to sell the property, this presumed resulting trust will constitute an encumbrance on the title: see Formking Development Ltd v Lee Kwok Hung Robert [1993] 1 HKC 412  
P344: (ii) Rebutting the presumption
P346: Yet the presumption of a resulting trust may be rebutted: eg by proof that a gift was intended or by the counter presumption of advancement. 
P348: See Fulltrend Co Ltd v Longer Year Development Ltd [1990] 1 HKC 452 (no resulting trust since purchaser had himself affixed seal of company assignee); Lion Will Investment Ltd v Triple Will Ltd [1992] 2 HKC 430 (husband nominated wife to be assignee; held presumption of resulting trust rebutted by counter presumption of advancement). 
P350: The presumption may also be rebutted by proof that the nominator intended an outright gift to the nominee: see Kan Wing Yee Wendy v Roh Julie Kim (2017) HCMP 352/2017 (nomination; the existence of a resulting trust was held to have been rebutted by way of a statutory declaration made, not by the solicitor involved in the transaction, who had died, but by a fellow solicitor who worked in the same firm).
P352: (iii) Equity’s darling
P354: Of course, the unregistrable interest of the nominator might be overridden by equity’s darling but this rule will not apply where the nomination is registered so that the new purchaser will have constructive notice of the interest of the nominator.
P356: (iv) Express renunciation by nominator
P357: The problem arising from any resulting trust is best avoided by the inclusion of a term in the nomination whereby the nominator renounces any interest he may retain in the property.
P360: Winding-up of company
P362: Where a company is in the course of being wound up and a liquidator has been appointed, any assignment or other deed executed by the liquidator in the exercise of his power of sale should be exercised by way of affixing the company’s common seal in accordance with the company’s articles of association. Yet see Stanford House Publication (HK) Ltd v Win Capital Industries Ltd [2006] 3 HKC 534, where Dty Judge Muttrie held that an assignment was also properly executed if the liquidator affixed his own seal.
P363:  
P365: Other matters to be checked
P367: For example, be aware also of the need for consent under the Home Ownership Scheme (see Chan Chi Hung v Tse Ying Piu (unreported) HCMP 3630/1994, 27/6/1995 . Proof of change of name might also be necessary: see Tsang Bing Kwan Andes v Korea Marvel Co Ltd [1997] 3 HKC 565 (vendor Korean company changed name between execution of sale and purchase agreement and assignment; in response to requisition vendor provided opinion from Korean law firm in Korean language; held that no adequate proof of change of name under Korean law; statutory declaration needed from authority such as Companies Registry or Land Registry in Korea in English language).
P371: PART B: CURRENT “CHAIN” – THE VENDOR 
P374: Rights of occupiers and others 
P376: We must also determine whether the interest of the occupier is overridden by `equity’s darling’, the bona fide purchaser without notice actual or constructive. Occupiers' rights (usually in a domestic context) and non-occupiers’ rights (usually but not invariably in a commercial context) can give rise to serious problems for purchasers. Occupiers and non-occupiers may have acquired a beneficial interest in the property under a common intention resulting trust, or they have contributed to the purchase price, or made mortgage repayments. 
P378: This interest will be unregistrable since it will not usually be supported by a written document. Since it is unregistrable, it might be defeated by `equity’s darling’. A purchaser will have constructive notice of all interests which he should have discovered had he carried out such inquiries as a reasonable purchaser would make: Kong Lin Yeung v Lai In Peng [2012] 4 HKC 128. The `value’ paid by the purchaser (or mortgagee) need not necessarily connote the full value of the property: see Ng Luk Mui v Shiu Tsun Wai Vincent [2011] 5 HKLRD 707, CA. 
P380: See William & Glyn's Bank v Boland [1981] AC 487 (H & W purchased property jointly but property transferred into sole name of  H who mortgaged it to bank; when bank tried  to take possession upon H’s default, held that bank had constructive notice of interest of wife so could not take possession); Wong Chim Ying v Cheng Kam Wing [1991] 2 HKLR 253, CA  (property purchased by H but transferred into name of W; W left H and sold flat; held that purchaser had constructive notice of H’s interest when purchaser saw H’s clothing in the property on viewing); Kingsnorth Finance v Tizard [1986] 1 WLR 783 (car in garage; mortgagee bound by wife's interest although wife not in actual occupation); China & South Seas Bank Ltd v Ma Koon Ah (unreported) HCMP 3000/94, 23/3/2001 (person who had paid 90% of purchase price was occupant although flat registered in another’s name; held bank mortgagee had constructive notice of interest of occupant); Flying Mortgage Ltd v Chan Kuen Kwong [2010] 1 HKLRD 318 (mother purchased flat but registered in names of her sons; sons mortgaged to bank; bank sought order for sale; held bank bound by mother’s interest by way of resulting trust since bank had constructive notice of her interest).
P382: Leases. A purchaser will have constructive notice of the leasehold interest of a tenant in occupation which is under an agreement for a lease (i.e. even if it is an equitable lease): see Hunt v Luck [1902] Ch 428, HL
P384: Common intention constructive trusts. Most of the recent litigation centres round this topic. A spouse, other occupier or even a non-occupier may acquire an equitable interest in the property where there is found to be a common intention supported by detriment to give that person an equitable interest in property. 
P386: See Liu Wai Keung v Liu Wai Man [2013] 5 HKLRD 9 (the plaintiff and defendant, who were brother and sister, decided to purchase a family home in 1979 and the down payment was funded by the plaintiff; the property, which was subject to a mortgage, was put in the defendant’s name since she could obtain a mortgage on preferential terms as she worked for a bank; the plaintiff and his family went into occupation and paid all outgoings until 2012 when the property was sold for redevelopment; the plaintiff had made all the mortgage repayments. Just before the sale, the plaintiff commenced proceedings against the defendant claiming that the defendant held the property by way of a common intention constructive trust in favour of the plaintiff; Godfrey Lam J agreed concluding that, on the evidence, there had been a common understanding and intention formed by the family in 1979 that the property had been intended for the plaintiff’s use and had only been put into the defendant’s name to secure a mortgage on preferential terms; the plaintiff, by paying all the outgoings including the mortgage repayments, had altered his position in reliance on this common intention and it would be unconscionable to allow the defendant to assert her title to the property against him). 
P388: A holistic approach was applied in the domestic context in Hong Kong: see Prime Credit Ltd v Yeung Chun Pang Barry 4 [2017] 4 HKLRD 327, CA (Lam VP: In a domestic context, particularly in relation to a matrimonial home, the court is not constrained in that exercise by pure direct monetary contributions to the purchase price… In a Chinese setting, especially for the older generations, where explicit discussions on property rights within the family are not that common, the court has to pay more regard to circumstantial matters)
P390: See Judge Godfrey Lam’s summary of the legal principles for determining the beneficial ownership of a family home in a case where the property had been purchased in the joint names of a cohabiting couple (Re Mok Wut Man [2020] HKCFI 1357). 
P392: See Recorder Madam Tam SC’s summary of the relevant legal principles (Chin Nai Man v Chin Yat Keung Alex [2020] HKCFI 403, and application of the concept in Mak Mui v Pang Kit Man [2021] HKCFI 125, Au Yeung Pui Chun v Cheng Wing Sang [2021] HKCFI 463 and Tsang Hin Yi Hubert v Cheung Lai  Ping [2022] HKEC 554.   
P394: Contribution to purchase price (including payment of deposit). A person in occupation or non-occupier may acquire an interest in the property if he or she has contributed to the purchase price: see Pettitt v Pettitt [1970] AC 777; Tinsley v Milligan [1993] 3 All ER 65 (two women purchased house but house transferred into name of one so that the other could claim housing benefits from the Government; held resulting trust created). This includes, of course, making mortgage repayments: Tong Kwai Ying v Poon Kwok Sin (unreported) HCA 2790/1996 04/06/2001 (a resulting trust will only be inferred from the repayment of mortgage instalments where there are strong grounds to infer a common intention that the person paying the instalments will acquire a beneficial interest in the property).
P396: As for the occupier’s priority as against a mortgagee see Abbey National Building Society v Cann [1990] 2 WLR 832, HL (In this case a person (`the claimant’) took up occupation of property, which had been purchased by way of a mortgage loan on completion. The claimant claimed to have acquired an equitable interest by way of resulting trust in the property by virtue of having provided part of the deposit and also claimed that his equitable interest took priority over the interest of the chargee bank. The House of Lords held that, where a purchaser relied on a loan from a bank or building society for completing his or her purchase, the transactions of acquiring the legal estate and granting the charge were one indivisible transaction. This was because the acquisition of the legal estate was entirely dependent upon the provision of the loan. Where, therefore, the loan was made prior to the occupant entering into occupation, the equitable interest of the occupier would not take priority over the interest of the lender/chargee. In the instant case the mortgage took priority over the resulting trust).
P398: The counter-presumption of advancement. We also need to consider the counter-presumption of advancement. This was explained by Lord Phillips MR in Lavelle v Lavelle [2004] EWCA Civ 223:
P400: “Where one person, A, transfers the legal title of a property that he owns or purchases to another, B, without receipt of any consideration, the effect will depend on his intention. If he intends to transfer the beneficial interest in the property to B, the transaction will take effect as a gift and A will lose all interest in the property. If he intends to retain the beneficial interest for himself, B will take the legal interest but will hold the property on trust for A. Normally there will be evidence of the intention with which a transfer is made. Where there is not, the law applies presumptions. Where there is no close relationship between A and B, there will be a presumption that A does not intend to part with the beneficial interest in the property and B will take the legal title under a resulting trust for A. Where, however, there is a close relationship between A and B, such as father and child, a presumption of advancement will apply. The implication will be that A intended to give the beneficial interest in the property to B and the transaction will take effect accordingly.”
P401:  
P402: The counter-presumption of advancement has been held to apply in the following situations:
P404: Assignments from:
P405: (i) husband to wife; 
P406: (ii) father to children; 
P407: (iii) a male fiancé to his female fiancée; 
P408: (iv) a man to his de facto wife: Cheung Pui Yuen v Worldcup Investments Inc (2009) 12 HKCFAR 31 
P409: (v) person to those to whom he stands in loco parentis (Wong San Mui, the Personal Representative of Hall Kimson Decd v Ha Pa Yang Patrick (unreported) HCA 6027/1993, per Woo J (grandfather to grandson) and in Sze Ka Shuen v Silkease Investments Ltd (unreported) HCMP 2201/2005, 18/12/2007, per Kwan J (stepfather to stepson); and 
P410: (vi) mother to child: see Watson v Smith [1998] 3 HKC 461, CA  (no counter-presumption of advancement); Lee Tso Fong v Kwok Wai Sun [2008] 4 HKLRD 270  (Dty Judge To held that the presumption of advancement applied, not only as between father and child, but also as between mother and child; judge declined, however, to extend, the presumption to a gift from mother to daughter-in-law). The Court of Final Appeal has ruled in Suen Shu Tai v Tam Fung Tai (2015) (2015) 18 HKCFAR 491 that the counter presumption of advancement should apply between mother and infant child (whether it should apply between mother and adult child was left unresolved).
P412: Note no presumption of advancement yet established where assignment from wife to husband: Mercier v Mercier [1903] 2 Ch 98, female fiancée to male fiancé or between siblings: Yue Shiu Ngam v Zen She Lin [1999] 1 HKC 823.
P414: The evidential value of the presumption of advancement may now, however, be very weak: Lily Cheung v Commissioner of Estate Duty [1988] 1 HKLR 517. 
P416: Whether or not the counter-presumption of advancement will apply is a matter for the court to determine on the evidence.
P418: Contractual licences. An occupier may also have a right of occupation by way of a contractual licence which could give rise to a constructive trust: see Chen Tek Yee v Chan Moon Shing (unreported) CACV 136/2015, 29/02/2016.
P419: Waiver? A person having a beneficial interest in property by way of a resulting or constructive trust may expressly waive the right: see Sum Fan Hung v Chum Mei Diu (unreported) HCA 946/2013, 04/06/2015.
P421: Delay in asserting beneficial interest. Further, a person who unduly delays in claiming his beneficial interest in property registered in the name of another may be held to have impliedly waived his interest: see Mo Ying v Brillex Development Ltd [2015] 3 HKC 104, [2015] 2 HKLRD 985, CA (flat registered in husband’s name; 15 years later flat sold by husband but family remained in possession under tenancy granted by new owner; when  new owner sought possession wife claimed equitable interest in property by way of common intention constructive trust; claim dismissed; Cheung JA said, obiter, that the Court of Appeal had held in Wong Chim-ying v Cheng Kam-wing [1991] 2 HKLR 253 that occupation might give actual or constructive notice of such interest; in the instant case the wife had indeed been in occupation when the property was sold to the purchaser and the purchaser had failed to inspect the property before sale; the purchaser was, therefore, fixed with constructive notice of any interest she might have; however, the wife had waived (or she had been estopped from asserting) any such interest because she had failed to assert her interest at the time when the property had been sold; the wife had a duty to speak up once she realised that her husband had agreed to sell the property and, relying upon her silence, the purchaser had completed the sale; the purchaser had, accordingly, been prejudiced by the wife’s conduct when she could have sought to rescind the sale). Leave to appeal to CFA refused and decision on delay confirmed by CFA: see (2016) FAMV 48/2015.
P423: What action should a solicitor acting for a purchaser or mortgagee take? As a result of these decisions a purchaser or mortgagee should always check for occupants and get any occupant to sign a confirmation that he/she has no interest in the property. If it appears that the occupant does have an interest, he should either join in the assignment as confirmor or provide written renunciation of his equitable interest. 
P426: Illegal, immoral or improper purposes
P428: There has also been judicial consideration as to whether a purchaser of property can claim an equitable interest in that property where that property was transferred by the purchaser into the name of another in furtherance of an illegal, immoral or improper purpose on the part of the transferor eg to keep property away from potential creditors or to enable purchase of flat under the Home Ownership Scheme. It would appear that the transferor will not be prevented from claiming an equitable interest unless, to do so, he must rely upon that illegal, immoral or improper purpose: Yim Bo-Ying v Chung Iu-Warm [1985] HKLR 354, CA (23), Wong Sing v Wong Chun Wai (unreported) HCA 1872/2005, 15/10/2009; and Wu Wai Sum Stella v Man Ting Chu [2010] 5 HKLRD 125, CA. 
P430: For purchase of flat in another person’s name under the Home Ownership Scheme, see Cheuk Shu Yin v Yip So Wan (2012) 15 HKCFAR 344.
P432: Note that the test laid down in Tinsley v Milligan [1994] 1 AC 340 (HL) (the court will not assist an owner to recover his property if he has to rely on his own illegality to prove his title) (“the reliance’ rule”) has now been disapproved and overruled by the UK Supreme Court in Patel v Mirza [2016] UKSC 42. 
P434: Lord Toulson JSC approached the illegality doctrine by a “trio of necessary considerations” (or range of factors approach) which he summarized as follows: 
P436: “The essential rationale of the illegality doctrine is that it would be contrary to the public interest to enforce a claim if to do so would be harmful to the integrity of the legal system (or, possibly, certain aspects of public morality, the boundaries of which have never been made entirely clear and which do not arise for consideration in this case). 
P438: In assessing whether the public interest would be harmed in that way, it is necessary (a) to consider the underlying purpose of the prohibition which has been transgressed and whether that purpose will be enhanced by denial of the claim; (b) to consider any other relevant public policy on which the denial of the claim may have an impact; and (c) to consider whether denial of the claim would be a proportionate response to the illegality, bearing in mind that punishment is a matter for the criminal courts.” 
P440: Despite Patel, in Kan Wai Chung v Hau Wun Fai [2016] 5 HKC 585, CA, (a decision handed down two days after Patel had been decided but without considering the judgment in Patel) the Court of Appeal ruled that Tinsley should be followed. In any event, Cheung JA made it clear that, in terms of the application of precedents, the Court was bound by the decision of the Court of Final Appeal which had adopted the majority view of Tinsley in HKSAR v Lau Kam Ying (2013) 16 HKCFAR 595. 
P442: Recently, the Court of Appeal in Monat Investment Ltd v Lau Chi Kan Kenith [2023] HKCA 479 has accepted that the range of factors approach in Patel. Further, she added that it would be ‘surprising’, absent any local HK factors, if the common law expounded by the UK Supreme Court is not also the common law of Hong Kong. The Court of Final Appeal would be free to depart from UK Supreme Court decisions. Accordingly, in Leung Ching Wai v Li Yun Lim [2023] HKDC 459, DDJ Frances Lok considered the abuse of the Green Form Scheme in that case is another kind of ‘profiteering” of public resources, and concluded that it was contrary to public policy to enforce the common intention constructive trust. It should be noted while reliance of the constructive trust was illegal, reliance on the presumption of resulting trust was not held to be illegal (see paras 73-76, and 87).
P444: The doctrine of locus poenitentiae. After Monat, it not entirely clear if this still doctrine would be of any use. For sake of completeness, there is a doctrine of locus poenitentiae (literally `place of repentance’). Where the plaintiff purchases property for an illegal purpose and has it assigned into the name of another person in favour of whom the counter-presumption of advancement applies (eg husband-wife, father-child), the purchaser/assignor will be unable successfully to claim an interest in the property by way of resulting trust because, to do so, the plaintiff would have to raise the issue of illegality: Wong Sing v Wong Chun Wai (unreported) HCA 1872/2005, 15/10/2009. Where, however, the plaintiff husband, having assigned the property into the name of his wife or child, has repented the illegal purpose before it has been implemented, he may still be permitted to adduce evidence of his illegality to rebut the counter-principle of advancement and recover the property
P445:  
P446: See Cheerbond Development Ltd v Tung Kwok Yu [2010] 2 HKLRD 546  (property assigned by husband to wife to keep assets out of reach of potential creditors; held that presumption of resulting trust and counter-presumption of advancement applied; husband could, however, adduce evidence to rebut counter-presumption of advancement since he had not carried out his illegal intention).
P449: Breach of Government lease/Conditions of Grant giving rise to right of re-entry by Government
P451: The most obvious example of a defeasible title is one in respect of which the Government has the right of re-entry as a result of breach of the Government lease/Conditions of Grant: eg failure to pay Government rent or comply with any of the covenants in the Government lease or conditions in the Conditions of Grant. Yet see New Jade Enterprises Ltd v Jing Ying She Ltd (unreported) HCA 13764/97, 22/9/2000 (failure to pay a small sum due by way of Government rent would not give rise to a real risk of re-entry by Government). 
P453: See, for example, Lee To Ming v Tam Kim Sum William [1999] 2 HKC 865 (no building exceeding 4 storeys to be erected on site; op issued for 5 storey building; held since op issued by Building Authority, Government could still re-enter for breach of Government lease).
P456: Breach of the occupation permit and material change in user
P458: Breach of the occupation permit. A breach of the occupation permit may render the owner’s title defeasible. Such was the case in Wong Wai Yip v Ho Wai Fung (unreported) DCMP 2221/2015, 27/1/2017. In this case the occupation permit for the commercial floor of a building in Kowloon provided for five shops (shops A-E), whereas there were in fact six shops on the floor (shops A-E and shop E1). The plan of the floor annexed to the first assignment also showed only five shops (shops A-E) on the floor. Shop E1 had apparently been constructed after the issue of the occupation permit in a v-shaped space (a lobby) shown on the plan. When the present owner of the sixth shop (shop E1) agreed to sell it to a purchaser, the purchaser raised a requisition asking the vendor to explain the discrepancy, pointing out that neither the occupation permit nor the plan showed shop E1. Dty Judge Kam Cheung concluded that shop E1 constituted unauthorised building works and rendered the vendor’s title defeasible.
P460: Intended material change of user. Section 25(1) of the Buildings Ordinance requires an owner to give notice to the Building Authority if he intends to make a material change of user (assuming such does not breach the Government lease/Conditions of Grant, deed of mutual covenant or occupation permit) and, on receipt of such notice, the BA may object to the change. The use of a building will be considered to be materially changed (a) where the carrying out of building works for the erection of a building intended for such use would have contravened the provisions of the Buildings Ordinance; or (b) where the Building Authority could have refused to give approval to the plans under s 16(1)(g) of the Ordinance (the `rate and range’ clause).
P462: In the absence of such notice (and the absence of any consequent objection), the vendor's title might be defeasible if he makes a material change of user in breach of the user designated in the occupation permit; see Worldfull Investments Ltd v Young King Asia Ltd [1996] 4 HKC 238 (occupation permit prescribed user as `garage for 10 motor vehicles'; after building works used as shop premises; held title defeasible); Even Growth Investment Ltd v Shing Yip Investment Co Ltd (unreported) HCMP 2369/1996, 29/07/1996 (op designated three shops with cocklofts; cocklofts converted into restaurant; held material change in user); but no material change in user where no structural alterations involved: Summit Investment Ltd v Shia Ning Enterprise Ltd [1999] 2 HKLRD 798. Also in Chan Sing Hoi Enterprises Ltd v Vykon Media Technology Ltd (unreported) CACV 324/2007, 04/07/2008 it was held s.25 BO does not itself make change of user (or failure to give notice) unlawful. It is only when one fails to comply with an order then under s.25(2) BO there is an offence committed
P465: Title defeasible because the extent of the property is unclear or because the boundaries do not correspond with plan or because of encroachment
P467: Unclear or wrong boundaries. A title might also be defeasible because the extent of the property is unclear or the boundaries do not correspond with the relevant plan. See Tam Mo Yin v Attorney-General [1996] 1 HKC 379; Fan Tony v Incorporated Owners of Kung Lok Building (2006) HCMP 1861/2004 (car parking space did not correspond with plan as it had been moved and guard post built on its proper location; mandatory injunction to reinstate car-parking space granted).
P469: Encroachment. Encroachment over Government land might render the title defeasible: see Chan Hong Chung v Mak Kiu (1995) HCMP 1961/1995 (balcony protruding over public street); yet cf Gold Glory International (Hong Kong) Ltd v KW Wong Investment Co Ltd (2013) HCMP 1618/2012 (title not affected by overhanging balcony since Government had granted permission).
P471: For further illustrations of encroachment over private property giving rise to a defeasible title see Profit World Trading Ltd v Ho So Yung [2011] 2 HKC 473, [2011] 2 HKLRD 773, CA (conversion of part of car port into sitting room); Widely Success (HK) Ltd v Hollywood Land Ltd (2010) DCCJ 5851/2008 (96) (main doors to the properties had been altered and extended into the common areas (specifically the corridor) of the building).
P474: Fraudulent Conveyances (also connected to proof of due execution below)
P476: Fraudulent conveyance under ss 60 and 61, Conveyancing and Property Ordinance. As for the meaning of the words `with intent to defraud creditors’ see Tradepower (Holdings) Ltd (in liquidation) v Tradepower (Hong Kong) Ltd (2009) 12 HKCFAR  417, [2010] 1 HKLRD 674 (50) (where it was objectively shown that a disposition of property unsupported by consideration was made by a disponor (seller) when insolvent (or who thereby rendered himself insolvent) with the result that his creditors (including his future creditors) were clearly subjected at least to a significant risk of being unable to recover their debts in full, such facts ought in virtually every case to be sufficient to justify the inference of an intent to defraud creditors on the disponor’s part). See Chan Sze Wing v Congruence Chinese Medicine & Jing Luo Health Ltd [2020] HKCFI 2596. See also Erwiana Sulistyaningsih v. Tsui Yun Bun Barry and Law Wan Tung  [2018] 1 HKLRD 505 (Held: “Deed of separation” executed in favor of D1 (Husband) after criminal trial of D2 and the subsequent transfer at nil consideration - a fraudulent conveyance to defraud “future creditors”)
P478: Also note that assignment by way of security for loan that is illegal under the Money Lenders Ordinance.
P480: Also take note of a risk of that up in the chain of title, there could be breach of fiduciary duty owed by purchaser to vendor: see Chiu Che Kuen v Or Yue Ling (unreported) HCA 5543/1990, 15/11/1995 (purchase by solicitor's clerk). See also Tang Ying Ki v Maxtime Transportation Ltd [1996] 3 HKC 257 (sale of property by mortgagee to himself)
P483: Non-compliance with Fire Safety Directions/Orders
P485: Many of such orders are against not just individual owners, but the co-owners collectively: i.e. the improvement of fire safety measures in the common areas. In Ip Fong Keng v. Fong Yu Shing (unreported) HCMP 843/2017 (3.7.2019), the Fire Safety Direction under the Fire Safety (Buildings) Ordinance (Cap 572) by Fire Services Department (“FSD”) did NOT constitute a blot in title though an order under s.24 BO did, and an offer of post-completion payment/retention money/undertaking would be, if requisition was valid, sufficient. There are a few types of Fire Safety Directions/Order. To determine whether such directions/orders may amount to a title defect, as explained in E Global [2013] 5 HKC 192, Ip Fong Keng, and Sky Globe Holding Ltd v Hung Lee Estates [2023] 4 HKLRD 413, would be whether the FSD has the power, upon non-compliance, to conduct the repairs, and thereafter register a charge on the property. Under ss. 19U and 19V of the Fire Safety (Buildings) Ordinance (Cap 572), the FSD has such a power, but only after carrying out “fire safety improvement works” (i.e. FSD carries out the works upon non-compliance of any order or fire services direction). Further, one should be wary of whether the FSD can sue the owners in a civil lawsuit, which could create liability for co-owners.  
P488: Severance of Joint Tenancy
P490: ‘Secret mortgages’ by one owner: Mak Pui Ki v. Ho Wing Ha HCMP 898/2020 (22.10.2020) (Held: Mortgage did sever the joint tenancy (c.f. Ho Wai Kwan v. Chan Hon Kuen (Charging order does not destroy JT)). The remaining owner did not acquire the interest by way of survivorship. Title was defective.)
P492: By mutual agreement or conduct in equity: Wong Anita Shu Ting v. Yuen Yiu Chung HCMP 710/2021 (26.1.2022) (Held: Consent order and transfer of property between former spouses amounted to severance of JT. Title derived from transferee spouse was found to be good)
P495: Sale of holding companies and corporate due diligence
P497: This will depend on due diligence clauses in the sale and purchase agreement. See Castle Global v. Ip (unreported) HCMP 645/2019, 15/6/2020 (CFI) (Vendor failed to provide audited accounts/draft management accounts before agreed completion date. Due diligence clause cannot be construed to mean that the vendor has right to defer the completion date whenever the purchaser is ‘unsatisfied’); and Dragon Access Holdings v. Lo Chu Hung (unreported) HCMP 1355/2019, 13/11/2020 per Au Yeung J and Wang Sheng v. Sin Yuk Ling (unreported) DCMP 760/2020 8/9/2021 per DJ Charles Wong
P500: PART C: PROOF OF DUE EXECUTION OF TITLE DOCUMENTS
P502: A vendor by way of proof of title must not only produce the required title documents but he must also show that they have been properly executed.
P505: Deeds executed by natural persons
P507: Deeds executed by natural persons must be signed, sealed and delivered. 
P509: Delivery involves an intention to make the deed public. Thus Judge Richard Seymour QC said in Bibby Financial Services Ltd v Magson [2011] EWHC 2495:
P511: The critical thing is that the person who has signed the deed must have separately indicated that he intends to be bound by the deed. Mere signature is not enough. Nor is it enough that what looks like a deed has been given to the person who appears to be the beneficiary of it – the issue is not whether the document has been physically handed over to the beneficiary, but whether the person whose deed it is supposed to be intended to be bound by it.
P513: Note the meaning and effect of execution in escrow. 
P515: As a rule of practice, but not of law, conveyancing documents should also be attested (ie witnessed) by a solicitor: Champhon Industrial Ltd v Hight Projects Industrial Ltd (unreported) HCMP 3631/1992, 29/12/1992. If in any case it is impracticable for a solicitor to be present to attest, the document may be attested by a solicitor's clerk but, in such a case, the clerk's signature must be verified by a solicitor. According to a Practice Direction (A9) a solicitor may not, however, attest the signatures of other parties to the deed whom they do not represent. 
P517: A deed executed by a natural person is deemed sealed: s 19(2), Conveyancing and Property Ordinance and no requisition should be raised as to the absence or nature of the seal.
P519: Deeds executed by companies
P521: (i) Introduction: the two regimes
P523: The law governing the execution of deeds by companies has undergone a significant change as a result of the enactment of the Companies Ordinance (Cap 622), which came into effect on 3rd March 2014. We now have two somewhat overlapping regimes. In respect of deeds executed prior to 3rd March 2014 the `old’ regime will continue to apply and is unaffected by the `new’ regime. As we will see below, under the `old’ regime, deeds had to be executed under the company’s common seal which had to be affixed in accordance with the company’s articles of association. The vendor had to prove due execution and might rely upon the statutory presumptions in ss 20(1), 23, 23A(1) and 23A(2) of the Conveyancing and Property Ordinance. In respect of deeds executed prior to 3rd March 2014 this old regime will continue to apply. 
P525: For deeds executed by companies after 2nd March 2014 the `new regime’ will apply and companies may execute deeds either under the company’s common seal or under the hand of one or more directors depending on the nature of the company. The vendor will still, of course, have to prove due execution and may, in respect of deeds executed under hand, now rely on the new presumption in section 127(6) of the Companies Ordinance (Cap 622). Where a deed is executed by a company under the `new regime’ by affixing its common seal, the presumptions in the Conveyancing and Property Ordinance (Cap 32) will still apply.
P527: Mode of execution of deeds by companies before 3rd March 2014: ie under the `old regime’
P529: Although a company was permitted prior to 3rd March 2014 and is still permitted after 2nd March 2014 to execute contracts such as sale and purchase agreements under hand, where the company was required to execute a deed prior to 3rd March 2014, the deed had to be signed, sealed and delivered. For sealing, the company had to affix its common seal to any deed executed in its name. The requirements of sealing and execution in accordance with the company’s articles of association are dealt with below.
P531: (ii) Company’s common seal: required formalities, failure to comply with required formalities and absence of common seal on deed
P534: Under the `old regime’ the company’s common seal had to be affixed in the manner authorised by the corporation's Articles of Association. This meant that the deed had to comply with s 93(1), old Companies Ordinance (Cap 32) (at least since 1984) by the affixing of the company’s metallic seal on which its name must be engraved in legible characters. A rubber seal would not suffice: On Hong Trading Co Ltd v Bank of Communications (unreported) HCMP 3099/1999, 29/02/2000, per Recorder Kotewall. 
P536: (iii) Illegible common seal
P538: See Wang Zhidun v Tsoi Ming Pui [2011] 3 HKC 314, DCt (court held that a common seal on which the vendor company’s name was illegible failed to comply with the statutory requirements of s 93(1) of the Companies Ordinance (Cap 32); vendor agreed to sell his flat to the purchaser; the purchaser raised a requisition concerning an assignment in the chain of title period which had been executed by a corporate vendor by way of affixing a common seal on which the vendor’s name was illegible; Dty Judge Wilson Chan, agreeing that the company’s name on the common seal was indeed illegible applied On Hong Trading Co Ltd v Bank of Communications (unreported) HCMP 3099/1999, 29/02/2000, and held that the requisition had not been properly answered and the vendor had failed to show good title).
P540: (iv) Wrong or missing common seals
P542: See Au Wai Ming v Kam Tze Ming Alfred [2009] 4 HKC 469, [2010] 1 HKLRD 198, CA (mortgage of property; deed of release executed by first mortgagee company in two capacities, first in its own right and secondly as attorney for second mortgagee; only one common seal affixed next to one of two execution clauses; held that execution defective and no effective release of mortgage).
P544: See also Li Kwan Chuen v Vector Development Ltd [2009] 3 HKLRD 511 (on assignment company affixed seal of director instead of company’s common seal; held assignment void and confirmatory assignment required).
P546: (v) Miss-spelling of company’s name
P548: The mis-spelling of the company’s name on the common seal will not render any deed so sealed defective provided the company had intended to execute the document as its deed: Good Lion Ltd v Chung Sai Wing [2008] 6 HKC 443, [2009] 2 HKLRD 25. 
P550: (vi) Place where common seal affixed
P552: The common seal should, of course, be affixed so as to form part of the execution clause of the deed: see Man Kwok Lam v Keung Yeuk Chun (unreported) HCMP 4067/1997, 01/04/1998 (no common seal affixed as part of the execution clause but there was a common seal affixed on the receipt clause which immediately followed the execution clause. Deputy Judge Wesley Wong ruled that the receipt clause formed part of the assignment and, even though the common seal had not been affixed on the execution clause but only on the receipt, it had clearly been the intention of the vendor to execute the document as a deed. The deed had, therefore, been validly executed).
P554: (vii) Attestation: the mode of execution of the deed has to comply with the company’s articles of association 
P556: Not only had the deed to be executed by the affixing of the company’s common seal, but that seal had to be affixed in the authorised manner so as to comply with the company’s articles of association. In the absence of any express or implied exclusion or modification (which would be very rare), s 11 of the former Companies Ordinance (Cap 32) used to provide that the regulations laid down in Table A of the former Companies Ordinance would apply. Article 114 of Table A provides that every instrument to which the seal must be affixed must be signed by a director and must be countersigned by the secretary or by a second director or by some other person appointed by the directors for the purpose (`the 2 director rule’). Following the enactment of the Companies Ordinance (Cap 622), section 9 of Schedule 11 Part 3 of the Transitional Arrangements provides that Table A continues to apply to existing companies. The Financial Secretary is empowered to prescribe new model articles for companies by s 78 of Cap 622. 
P558: At common law a deed is duly executed by a company when the common seal is affixed and there is no requirement of attestation: see Agar v Athenaeum Life Assurance Society (1858) 3 CB (NS) 725, per Willis J at 756, cited with approval in Peking Fur Store Ltd v Bank of Communications [1993] 1 HKC 625; Grand Trade Development Ltd v Bonance International Ltd [2000] 4 HKC 57.  
P560: Proof of due execution: the statutory presumptions
P562: Two important sections of the Conveyancing and Property Ordinance provide considerable practical assistance to solicitors required to prove the due execution of documents by corporations.
P564: (i) S 20(1), Conveyancing and Property Ordinance
P566: S 20(1), Conveyancing and Property Ordinance provides that, in favour of a person dealing with the corporation in good faith, a deed will be deemed to have been duly executed by the corporation if the deed purports to bear the seal of the corporation affixed in the presence of and attested by its secretary or other permanent officer and a director or by two directors (the `two directors rule’).
P568: (ii) S 23, Conveyancing and Property Ordinance
P571: S 23, Conveyancing and Property Ordinance provides that an instrument appearing to be duly executed will be presumed, until the contrary is proved, to have been duly executed. This codifies the common law presumption `Omnia praesumuntur rite esse acta’.
P573: The Court of Final Appeal held in Leung Kwai Lin Cindy v Wu Wing Kuen [2001] 1 HKLRD 212, CFA, that “s 23 is remedial, to facilitate conveyancing… the matter should be approached broadly thus: Does it appear from all the circumstances of the case that the instrument was duly executed? If the answer is yes, the section presumes the instrument to have been duly executed, until the contrary is proved (Mr Justice Litton, NPJ).    
P575: (iii) Application of ss 20(1) and 23, Conveyancing and Property Ordinance (`the Ordinance’)
P577: There is some useful case law applying these provisions. It is suggested that the following conclusions can be drawn:
P579: Two attesting signatories 
P580: Where a document executed after 1 November 1984 complies with s 20(1) (the `two directors rule’), it will be deemed to have been duly executed. 
P582: Where a deed fails to comply with the requirements of s 20(1) of the Ordinance, the deed will not be presumed to have been duly executed under s 23 of the Ordinance. Need to ask for relevant Board resolution. 
P584: An illustration of this approach may be provided in Kan Yui Man Allen v Ng Hiu Nam (unreported) DCMP 174/2011, 14/10/2011 (this case involved the question whether a power of attorney had been properly executed; the power of attorney, which had been created by deed, had been executed in 1998 by the affixing of the common seal of the donor bank in the presence of two attesting signatories. Dty Judge Lo held that the presumption in s 23 of the Conveyancing and Property Ordinance did not apply and the vendor had a duty to provide a copy of the relevant articles of the donor; since the vendor had failed to provide a copy of the company’s articles, he had failed to show good title, nor did the presumption in s 20(1) apply since the two attesting signatories did not both fall within s 20(1)).
P586: One attesting signatory
P589: Where a deed has been sealed but there is only one director signatory attesting, s 20(1) of the Ordinance has no application (though s 23A may apply). 
P591: Where a company’s articles require execution of deeds together with the attesting signature of a particular office holder such as the managing director or company secretary and the deed has been executed by one person who is expressly stated in the execution clause to hold that office, the deed is presumed to be validly executed under s 23 of the Ordinance. It would appear that where a deed has been sealed and there is only one signatory director attesting, the deed will not be presumed valid under s 23 since there is no ‘appearance’ of due execution. However, if the articles of association do provide for the contingency of one director’s signature, then can the presumption in s.23 CPO be applied? In Tread East Ltd v Hillier Development Ltd (unreported) HCA 907/1991, 11/11/1992, there was only one director signature with an execution clause stating that the director was “one of its directors as directed and authorised by the board of directors to sign”. The company’s articles required all documents to be affixed its seal or in a such a manner as the directors shall from time to time by resolution determine, and hence it was possible for an assignment to be validly executed by one director.  It was held that s.23 applied. See also Liu Xiao Dong v Chase Eagle Development Ltd [2013] 1 HKLRD 933; Lee Chat v China Roll Industries Ltd [1998] 1 HKC 269;. Do note that if s.23 cannot be invoked, then the vendors should supply a copy of the board resolution showing that the signatory was a director authorized by the board to execute the deed.
P594: Where a company’s articles require the attesting signature of a particular person such as the managing director or company secretary or person authorised by the Board and the deed has been attested by one person who is not stated in the execution clause to hold that office or to have been so authorised, the deed will not be presumed to have been validly executed under s 23 of the Ordinance since there is no appearance of proper execution: see Li Ying Ching v Air-Sprung (Hong Kong) Ltd [1996] 4 HKC 418 (assignment executed by JH as director; articles required execution by Chairman of Board or two directors; no proof that JH was Chairman of Board); Wong Yuet Wah Mandy v Lam Tsam Yee [1999] 3 HKC 268 (articles required that deeds must be signed by two directors or in such manner as directors by resolution determine; assignment signed by one director; held execution defective in absence of resolution; s 23 did not apply). 
P597: Other modes of attestation 
P599: Where the company’s articles require attestation by a mode that has clearly not been adopted, the title may be defective (defeasible) and may be set aside by the company: Au Hon Kwong v Sure Woollen Yarns Co Ltd (unreported) HCMP 3979/1992, 29/01/1993  (mortgage executed by one director of the mortgagor company and, upon production of the articles, it was found that they provided that at least half of the board of directors was required to join together to execute any deed; it was common ground that, at the time the mortgage had been executed, the company had four directors; the property had subsequently been sold to the vendor by the mortgagee upon default by the mortgagor; the court ruled that the title was defective by reason of the improper execution of the mortgage, leading to the result that the mortgagee had no power to sell); Whole Year Development Ltd v Lung Chiu Yee Julia (unreported) HCMP 966/1993, 21/06/1993 (company’s articles required attestation by one director with the countersignature of another director or the company secretary, but an assignment had been attested by two persons neither of whom held the post of director or company secretary; the court held that the title was defective). 
P601: In such cases, the best remedy to ‘cure’ the title would be a confirmatory assignment executed by the company.
P603: Subsequent ratification by board resolution
P606: A title which is defective because of an invalid execution by a predecessor company in the chain of title period may be ‘cured’ by an appropriate resolution of the company: Peking Fur Store Ltd v Bank of Communications [1993] 1 HKC 625. This does not per se cure the defective execution but manifests that there is no real risk of a successful action by the company to set aside the previous defective transaction.
P608: A board resolution authorising a present sale to be conducted in a manner violating the requirements of the company’s articles as to execution cannot, however, compel a present intending purchaser to accept the title of the vendor as a good title: Ring View Ltd v Modern Thorns Co Ltd (1997) HCA 3626/1996.
P610: If the relevant resolution is missing, secondary evidence (in accordance with the rule in Re Halifax) as to the existence and contents of the resolution may be admissible provided the rules as to the admissibility of secondary evidence of missing title documents is complied with: Goldenfix Properties Ltd v Cheer Hope Investments Ltd [1993] 1 HKC 360. 
P612: No real risk
P614: Even if execution is defective, the vendor will be entitled to force the title upon a purchaser if he can show that there is no real risk of the title being set aside (applying the MEPC test). The fact that the company, which might be entitled to set aside the transaction by reason of the defective execution of the deed, was wound up some years ago might satisfy this requirement: Hui Yuk Chun v Tang Wai Hang Henry (unreported) HCMP 1/1998, 03/04/1998 (execution in 1973 and company wound up in 1977); Chung Ka Leung v Secretary for Justice (1999) HCMP 4129/99 (defective execution but company wound up and Secretary for Justice confirmed she did not claim any interest in property as bona vacantia). See also Polyson Jewellery Co Ltd v Liu Song Carlos [2002] 2 HKC 183, CA (execution by one director but title not challenged for more than 20 years; held not sufficient merely to assert no real risk but all surrounding circumstances had to be shown by vendor).
P616: Statutory intervention and the effects of section 23A of the Conveyancing and Property Ordinance (`the Ordinance’)
P618: To remedy numerous defective executions by companies, s 23A of the Conveyancing and Property Ordinance was enacted. It came into effect on 9 May 2003 and applied to sale and purchase agreements signed after 9 May 2003. It provides:
P620: 23A. Proof of title and presumptions of due execution of deed by corporation
P621: (1) A deed purporting to be –
P623: (a) executed prior to the commencement of this section by or on behalf of a corporation aggregate; and
P624: (b) attested by a signatory or more than one signatory where the signatory or each of the signatories, if more than one, is a person who could have been authorised under the articles of association or other instruments of the corporation,
P625: shall, until the contrary is proved, be presumed for the purposes of proof of title to any land to have been duly executed by the purported signatory or signatories, as the case may be, with the authority conferred by the articles of association or other instruments of the corporation, whether or not the source of the authority or the means by which such authority was purportedly conferred is apparent from the deed.
P628: (2) Where any deed is or has been produced by a vendor as proof of title to any land and that deed purports to have been executed by a corporation aggregate not less than 15 years before the contract of sale of that land, it shall for the purposes of any question as to title to that land be conclusively presumed -
P629: (a) as between the parties to that contract; and
P630: (b) in favour of the purchaser under that contract as against any other person, that the deed was validly executed.
P632: (3) This section affects only the rights and obligations of the parties to a contract for the sale of land entered into on or after the commencement of this section.
P634: The main effects of s 23A CPO are as follows:
P636: The presumption in s 23A(1) of the Ordinance apply only to deeds produced as proof of title to land pursuant to sale and purchase agreements entered into after the section came into effect ie sale and purchase agreements entered into after 9 May 2003: see Silver Pioneer International Ltd v Good Onwards Co Ltd [2004] 4 HKC 253 (sale and purchase agreement dated April 2003; defective execution of deed of mutual covenant by company since only one director signatory and articles not produced; held s 23A did not apply since sale and purchase agreement entered into before section came into effect; vendor further argued that, since s 23A would apply when the property is sold in the future, there was no real risk to the present intending purchaser by reason of the defective execution of the dmc; argument rejected).  
P638: The provisions in s 23A(1) apply only to prior title defects (ie pre-9 May 2003) and do not extend to documents to be executed after 9 May 2003. They therefore create three different regimes: 
P640: (a) The first regime (ie s 23A(2)) applies to defects in the execution of title documents that are more than 15 years old as at the date of the sale and purchase agreement. These defects are conclusively presumed to be remedied as between the parties to the contract of sale and as between the purchaser and the whole world. 
P642: (b) The second regime (ie s 23A(1)) applies to documents executed before 9 May 2003. In respect of these documents, there is a rebuttable presumption of due execution. However, s 23A(1) is now largely redundant with the passage of time as a vendor is only required to prove title for 15 years under s13.  Further, anything before 2003 would be 15 years or more, in which s.23A(2)’s conclusive presumption would apply.  
P644: (c) The third regime relates to the future execution of title documents: ie all title documents executed after 9 May 2003. The amending legislation has no  effect on such documents and the legal requirements governing execution of conveyancing documents remain unchanged.
P646: Perhaps the most efficacious remedial provision in the legislation is s 23A(2), which provides that deeds purporting to have been executed by a corporation not less than 15 years before the present contract for sale will, for the purposes of any question as to title to that land, be conclusively presumed to have been validly executed. This provision gives statutory form to the ‘no real risk’ principle laid down by the House of Lords in MEPC v Christian Edwards [1981] AC 205. The presumption, however, only applies as between the parties to the contract and in favour of the purchaser as against the whole world. It does not, therefore, remove any accrued right of a third person to seek redress against the vendor or his predecessors in title. Shareholders (or the liquidators of the company on their behalf) who have been defrauded will, therefore, still have a right of redress from the present vendor or his predecessors in title. 
P648: The scope of s 23A(1) is rather more limited and the provision is intended to remedy certain defects in documents executed prior to 9 May 2003. It provides that, where a deed has been attested by one or more signatories, who were persons who could have been authorised to attest under the company’s articles, the deed will be presumed to have been duly executed. The presumption is rebuttable. It is important to identify clearly the scope of this provision.
P650: To take advantage of the remedial effect of s 23A(1), it is necessary first for the vendor to supply a copy of the articles in force at the relevant date of execution to the purchaser so that the intending purchaser can discover whether the attesting witness `could have been authorised’ to attest. This conclusion was supported by HH Judge Mimmie Chan in Schneider Wong Fung Yin v Peter Ngai (unreported) DCCJ 2904/2005, 08/10/2007 (nomination attested by one director of vendor company in chain of title; company de-registered; articles had to be supplied before presumption in s 23A(1) CPO would apply; this issue was not considered on the subsequent appeal). If, therefore, the articles cannot be found, s 23A(1) can provide no remedial assistance. 
P652: The presumption in s 23A(1) will not, however, apply where the articles require attestation by a stated number of signatories (for example attestation by two directors), but fewer signatures actually appear on the deed.
P654: Mode of execution of deeds by companies after 2nd March 2014 ie under the `new regime’
P656: (i) Introduction
P658: The new Companies Ordinance (Cap 622) took effect as from 3rd March 2014. This means that deeds executed by companies after 2nd March 2014 must comply with the requirements prescribed in the new Ordinance.
P660: (ii) Common seals
P662: A company may (but no longer must) have a common seal: Companies Ordinance (Cap 622) s 124(1). If the company chooses to have a common seal, it must be a metallic seal having the company’s name engraved on it in legible form: ibid s 124(2). Contravention of this requirement now gives rise to a criminal offence: ibid s 124(3) and (4).
P664: Where the company has a common seal for use outside Hong Kong, such common seal must be a replica of the company’s common seal but have engraved in legible form the name of every place where it is to be used: ibid s 125(2).
P666: (iii) Execution of deeds by companies; a choice of mode of execution
P668: As we will see below, as from 3rd March 2014, companies may execute deeds either under the company’s common seal or under hand. On or after that date a company may execute a document as a deed by (a) executing it in accordance with s 127 of the Companies Ordinance (cap 622) (ie by deed or under hand); (b) having it expressed (in whatever words) to be executed by the company as a deed; and (c) delivering it as a deed: Companies Ordinance (Cap 622) s 128(1)(a)-(c).  
P670: For the purposes of the requirement of delivery, a document is presumed, unless the contrary is proved, to be delivered as a deed on its being executed in accordance with s 127 of the Companies Ordinance (Cap 622): ibid s 128(2). 
P672: If there is any inconsistency between the provisions of the Companies Ordinance (Cap 622) and the provisions of any other Ordinance, this section prevails over those provisions to the extent of any conflict or inconsistency: ibid s 128(3).
P674: (iv) Execution under company’s common seal
P676: A company may execute a document under its common seal and, in such a case, the seal must be affixed in accordance with the company’s articles.
P678: The effect of this provision is that, if the company chooses to have a common seal and execute a deed under its common seal, it must comply with its articles. The company must, accordingly, prove due execution and, by way of such proof, the company may rely on the statutory presumptions in ss 20(1), 23, 23A(1) and 23A(2) of the Conveyancing and Property Ordinance. These presumptions have been dealt with above.
P681: (v) Execution under hand
P683: Since the enactment of the Companies Ordinance (Cap 622) a company may also execute a document (a) in the case of a company with only one director, by having it signed by the director on the company’s behalf; or (b) in the case of a company with 2 or more directors, by having it signed on the company’s behalf by (i) the 2 directors or any 2 directors; or (ii) any of the directors and the company secretary of the company: Companies Ordinance (Cap 622) s 127(3)(a), (b). If a person is to sign a document on behalf of 2 or more companies, the person must sign the document separately in each capacity: ibid s 127(4). A document signed in accordance with the above provisions and expressed (in whatever words) to be executed by the company has effect as if the document had been executed under the company’s common seal: ibid s 127(5). This means that the legal estate will pass even where the document, such as an assignment, has been signed rather than sealed.
P685: The above requirement will be complied with where the document `is signed on the company’s behalf’. Must such words (or words of similar effect) appear under the name or names of the signatories? This was at issue in Williams v Redcard Ltd [2011] EWCA Civ 466, [2011] All ER (D) 214, (CA). The English Court of Appeal, construing a similar section 44 of the Companies Act 2006, ruled that it was not the case that, in addition to the signatures of the authorised signatories, there had to be words spelling out that the signatures were `by or on behalf of the company’. Since it was clear that the signatories had signed on behalf of the seller, the document had been expressed to be executed by the company and the execution was valid and effective.
P687: The new Ordinance also provides a helpful presumption as to due execution. In favour of a purchaser in good faith for valuable consideration (including a lessee, a mortgagee and any other person who for valuable consideration acquires the property), a document is to be regarded as having been executed by a company if the document purports to have been signed in accordance with the above provisions: ibid s 127(6), (7). To discover whether the document does so `purport’, we may have to obtain the articles and check the capacity of those executing as stated in the execution clause.
P689: Finally, these provisions also apply to documents executed, or purporting to be executed, by a company in the name of another person whether or not that other person is also a company: ibid s 127(8). This extends the operation of the provisions to situations where the executing company is acting as an agent for another.
P692: Proof of due execution of deeds by foreign companies
P694: (i) Execution by a foreign company in Hong Kong
P696: It may be the case that one or more of the documents of title provided to the purchaser by way of showing title have been executed by a foreign company in Hong Kong. The starting point is that the formal validity of documents is governed by the law of Hong Kong: see Adams v Clutterbuck (1883) 10 QBD 403. As a result of the enactment of the  Companies Ordinance (Cap 622), which took effect from 3rd March 2014, we need to consider two regimes: the `old regime’, applying to deeds executed by foreign companies prior to 3rd March 2014, and the `new regime’, applying to deeds executed by foreign companies after 2nd March 2014. These have been considered above. 
P698: (ii) Execution by a foreign company abroad
P700: It may be the case that one or more of the documents of title submitted to the purchaser have been executed by a company abroad. The solicitor acting for the purchaser must, of course, check to ensure that such documents have been properly executed. The starting point is that formal validity will be governed by the law of Hong Kong: see Adams v Clutterbuck (1883) 10 QBD 403. This means that the vendor must prove beyond reasonable doubt that the deed has been validly executed in compliance with Hong Kong law; ie the common seal must be affixed in compliance with local statutory requirements and the attestation of the affixing of the common seal must be in compliance with the company’s articles.
P702: By way of proof of proper attestation where a document has been executed abroad by a company, the presumptions in ss 20, 23 and 23A of the Conveyancing and Property Ordinance may still be applied. Such was the holding in Excelling Profits Investments Ltd v Sera Ltd [1992] 2 HKC 262, CA (the court was called upon to decide whether two powers of attorney, one executed in Bermuda and one in Jersey, were validly executed; no evidence of the laws of Bermuda or Jersey was available. The Court of Appeal held  for the purposes of the Ordinance, `corporations aggregate’; included a foreign corporation and the vendors were entitled to rely on the statutory presumptions.
P704: These presumptions will not, of course, assist beyond proof of due attestation. For example, what will be the position where the foreign company is incorporated in a jurisdiction which does not recognize the need for common seals? In such a case, the document will still be proved to be validly executed if expert evidence shows that the execution is valid according to the relevant foreign law. This situation is exemplified in Wang Zhidun v Tsoi Ming Pui [2011] 3 HKC 314, DCt  (the vendor agreed to sell his flat to the purchaser; the purchaser raised a requisition concerning an assignment in the chain of title period which had been executed by a PRC corporate vendor by way of affixing a rubber chop; the purchaser raised a requisition contending that such execution was invalid under Hong Kong law relying on On Hong Trading Co Ltd v Bank of Communications (2000) HCMP 3099/1999; the vendor responded that metallic common seals were not recognized in the PRC; Dty Judge Wilson Chan first noted that, in the absence of expert evidence as to the relevant foreign law, PRC law would be presumed to be the same as Hong Kong law; in the instant case no adequate expert evidence as to PRC law had been adduced; the requisition had not, therefore, been properly answered and the vendor had failed to show good title); Liu Xiao Ming v Chase Eagle Development Ltd [2013] 1 HKLRD 933 (deed executed in the Mainland attested by only one person; court accepted expert evidence from Mainland law firm that deed duly executed in accordance with Mainland law).
P706: In the absence of such expert evidence, the Hong Kong courts will presume that foreign law is the same as Hong Kong law: see Wang Zhidun v Tsoi Ming Pui (unreported) DCMP 2707/2010, 01/03/2011; judgment 1 March 2011; Caspian Resources Development Pte Ltd v Fortune Oil Plc [2016] 3 HKC 13, [2015] 5 HKLRD 836 and a deed without a proper common seal will be invalid and no legal estate will pass.　
P708: Finally, it must be noted that the provisions of the Companies Ordinance (Cap 622) will apply to deeds executed by foreign companies after 3rd March 2014 so that such deeds may validly be executed under hand in accordance with s 127 of the Ordinance.
P711: Execution of documents by way of a Power of Attorney 
P713: (A) Manner of execution of power of attorney and manner of execution of document by an attorney
P715: (i) Manner of execution of power of attorney
P717: An instrument creating a power of attorney must be signed and sealed by, or by the direction and in the presence of, the donor of the power: s 2(1) of the Powers of Attorney Ordinance. 
P719: This requirement applies also to foreign powers of attorney to be used in Hong Kong. Note, however, s 26(1), LARCO, which provides:
P721: The fact that a power of attorney given by a foreign corporation to or in favour of any person is not under seal shall not, if such power of attorney is valid as a power of attorney in accordance with the laws of the place under which such corporation is incorporated, affect, for any purpose intended to be affected within Hong Kong, the validity or effect of any instrument under seal executed on behalf of such corporation by such person, which shall for all such purposes be as valid as if such authority had been given under seal.
P723: For s 26(1) of LARCO to apply, expert evidence will be required to establish that common seals are not used in the relevant foreign jurisdiction. See Li Yuen Ling v Tang Kwok Wai Thomas [2010] 1 HKC 550  (mortgage released by bank by attorney in Hong Kong authorized by foreign power of attorney issued by mortgagee bank in the Netherlands; power of attorney not sealed; no expert evidence of the law of the Netherlands was provided; held that this involved a matter of formality which was governed by Hong Kong law; s 23, CPO, did not apply since the power of attorney did not appear on its face to have been duly executed; release accordingly void). 
P725: As we have seen above, in the absence of such expert evidence, the Hong Kong courts will presume that foreign law is the same as Hong Kong law and the foreign power of attorney and any deed executed under the foreign power of attorney without a proper common seal will be invalid.　
P727: (ii) Manner of execution of document by donee of power of attorney
P729: The donee of a power of attorney (an attorney) may either execute a document in his own name or in the name of the donor.
P732: (B) Proof of due execution of documents executed by an attorney
P734: (i) Documents executed by way of a power of attorney not less than (ie more than) 15 years before present agreement for sale
P737: In respect of documents executed by way of a power of attorney not less than 15 years before the present agreement for sale, the power of attorney will be conclusively presumed (i) to have been validly executed; (ii) to be in force at the time of execution of a document (ie not revoked); and (iii) to have validly authorised the execution of that document: s 13(4A), Conveyancing and Property Ordinance. We have already seen that powers of attorney under which documents have been executed outside the last 15 years old (from the date of the present sale and purchase agreement) are not required to be produced by way of proof of title: s 13(1)(c), CPO. Yet this provision does not apply if the purchaser makes his own search and raises a requisition on a defect: Lo Hung Biu v Lo Shea Chung [1997] 2 HKC 723, CA (attorney had no authority to make gift of property). In Lo Hung Biu v Lo Shea Chung [1997] 2 HKC 723, CA, the Court of Appeal held that the conclusive presumptions in s 13(4A) do not extend to issues relating to the vires of the attorney (eg making a gift to himself).
P739: (ii) Documents executed by way of a power of attorney less than 15 years before present agreement for sale
P741: In respect of documents executed by way of power of attorney less than 15 years before the present agreement for sale:
P743: The power of attorney must be produced: s 13(1)(c), Conveyancing and Property Ordinance: see Big Boss Investment Ltd v So Lai Kei [2010] 1 HKLRD 793 (vendor has a duty to produce any power of attorney under which present assignment will be executed), although secondary evidence might be acceptable under the rule in Re Halifax: see Yeung Dallah Rudia v Copiluck Ltd [1992] 2 HKC 575. 
P745: This provision does not apply, however, to a power of attorney under which an assignment has been executed by way of a power of attorney on behalf of a purchaser: Lau Kwok Cheong Dinnes & Anor v Tse Ming Chiu [2001] 3 HKC 196 (execution of Conditions of Grant).
P747: The vendor must prove that the power of attorney was valid at the date of execution of the document; see Wong Kwai Fun v Li Fung (unreported) HCA 5810/1986, 28/01/1994 (power of attorney had been given as security for loan that was illegal under the Money Lenders Ordinance; power of attorney, therefore, void and title of purchaser defeasible). 
P749: The vendor must prove that the power of attorney authorised the attorney to do the act in question (ie matters of vires). 
P751: (iii) General powers of attorney
P753: A general power of attorney in the form in the Schedule to the Powers of Attorney Ordinance confers on the donee power to do on behalf of the donor anything that can lawfully be done as an attorney. See Standard Chartered Bank v Tang Chun (unreported) HCMP 3289/98, 16/09/1999 (attorney holding under general power mortgaged property to bank to secure loan made by bank to third persons whom donor did not know; held scope of attorney's powers unlimited and donor bound unless it could be shown that bank acting in bad faith). 
P755: Make sure you do not limit the general power by drafting in a special restricting provision: Multi-More Industries Ltd v Tung Hoo Fai [1991] 2 HKC 261, CA (additional words `deal with my properties'; not valid as general power); Chan Fei v Li Yee Wah [1995] 2 HKC 806 (power stated to be irrevocable; not general power); Standard Chartered Bank v Shem Yin Fun (unreported) HCMP 3289/1998, 13/05/2002 (use of ‘We’ instead of ‘I’ is acceptable; remains a general power).
P757: (iv) Special powers of attorney
P759: A special power of attorney (conferring special powers only) must be carefully construed to ensure that the attorney is authorised to carry out the particular act: cf Chan Pak Ho v Standard Chartered Asia Ltd [1988] 1 HKLR 216 (French power of attorney did not contain authority for donee to reassign mortgaged property); Wong Shui Yun Bernadette v Lau Wai Pui [1987] 3 HKC 513 (power of attorney which authorised attorney to sell the property impliedly authorised attorney to execute the assignment).
P761: Special problems arise where the attorney disposes of the property in his own interests eg by gift or sale to himself or to another. See Overseas Trust Bank Ltd v Tang Che Ching [1994] 2 HKLR 73 (donee mortgaged property to raise loan for himself); Li Ming On v Lucky Apple Ltd [1994] 2 HKLR 111 (sale at undervalue); Very Cheer Development Ltd v Bring All Ltd [1994] 1 HKC 796 (assignment at undervalue); Lo Hung Biu v Lo Shea Chung [1997] 2 HKC 723, CA (gift of property); Yook Lu Fong v Lam Po Ching [2002] 2 HKLRD 395 (sale of property by attorney to himself as trustee to hold on trust for another person who knew of attorney’s duties; held title voidable). In such cases the assignment is voidable not void: Lo Tai Yam v Hu Mu Simon [1997] HKLRD 588, per Stone J. The defect will be cured if no real risk of title being set aside: Ip Fung Yee v Norwegian Missionary Society [1998] 1 HKLRD 94 (donor ratified act of attorney so no real risk).
P763: The vendor must prove that the power of attorney has not been revoked (eg by express revocation, death, bankruptcy or incapacity). 
P765: A person who deals with an attorney who holds a power of attorney which is stated to be irrevocable is generally protected: see ss 4 and 5, Powers of Attorney Ordinance. 
P767: Note the special statutory provision applicable to powers of attorney in favour of mortgagees. S 4(2) of the Powers of Attorney Ordinance provides that a power of attorney given to secure a proprietary interest (ie the right of a mortgagee) may be given to the person entitled to the interest (ie the mortgagee) and that person shall be duly constituted donee for all purposes of the power. The power of attorney may be expressed to be irrevocable where it is given to secure a proprietary interest and, in such a case, shall not be revoked by the donor without the consent of the donee or by the death, incapacity or bankruptcy of the donor, or, if the donor is a corporation, by its winding up: s 4(1).
P769: See also the Enduring Powers of Attorney Ordinance which provides that an enduring power of attorney is not revoked by the incapacity of the donor. 
P771: In the case of powers of attorney which are not stated to be irrevocable the position is more complicated.
P773: As regards the person directly dealing with the donee (ie dealing with the attorney himself), s 5(2), Powers of Attorney Ordinance provides that, where a power of attorney has been revoked and a person without knowledge of the revocation deals with the donee of the power, the transaction between them will, in favour of that person, be as valid as if the power had been in existence.
P775: The position of a person who derives his title from the person dealing with the donee is more complex. Of course, if the power has not been revoked no problems should arise. If the power has been revoked, however, the title of a person deriving his title from the person who dealt directly with the attorney will depend upon whether the person dealing with the donee has knowledge of the revocation. 
P777: S 5(4), Powers of Attorney Ordinance provide that, where the interest of a purchaser depends on whether the transaction between the donee of a power of attorney and another person [the person dealing directly with the donee] was valid by virtue of subsection (2), it will be conclusively presumed in favour of the purchaser that that person did not at the material time know of the revocation of the power if:
P779: (a) the transaction between that person [ie the person dealing directly with the donee of the power] and the donee was completed within 12 months of the date on which the power of attorney came into operation; or 
P782: (b) that person [ie the person dealing with the donee] makes a statutory declaration before or within 3 months after the completion of the purchase [any subsequent purchase: see Kung Wing Chuen v Antony Louis Marden [1990] 1 HKLR 540 that he did not at the material time know of the revocation of the power. 
P784: To benefit from the conclusive presumption, the statutory declaration must be made before or within 3 months of the completion of a purchase: Au Siu Wing Jacky v Choy Ka Lee [1999] 1 HKC 248; WOC Finance Co Ltd v Wing On Cheong Investment Co Ltd [2000] 2 HKLRD 713 (statutory declaration must be made within 3 months of any sale but cannot be made by attorney himself). 
P786: Thus the person dealing with the donee (who may be either a purchaser or donee) should establish his own ignorance of any revocation for two purposes; first, to protect his own title under s 5(2) and secondly, to protect the title of any subsequent purchasers under s 5(4), PAO. 
P788: Note that the provision does not protect any subsequent donees. 
P790: It is suggested that s 5(4) PAO does not stipulate the exclusive manner of proving non-revocation (cf Xiamen International Finance Co Ltd v Tsui Tai Yan [1987] HKLR 977 and the statutory declaration may be made by the donor or the solicitors acting for the parties involved. It may not, however, be made by the attorney himself: see WOC Finance Co Ltd v Wing On Cheong Investment Co Ltd (supra). The court will also accept a letter from the donor (usually a bank) confirming that the power of attorney has not been revoked. Bear in mind, however, that in all such cases the conclusive presumption in s 5(4)(b), PAO, will not apply and the vendor will have to reply on the `no real risk’ test. 
P792: Note the special rules as to certification of powers of attorney laid down in ss 3(1) and (2) of the Powers of Attorney Ordinance (certification on every page). 
P794: Failure to stamp. Provided that the vendor’s counsel or solicitor is prepared to give an undertaking to stamp prior to completion, failure to stamp a document does not go to title; rather, it is a matter of mere conveyancing: Town Bright Industries Ltd v Bermuda Trust (HK) Ltd [1998] 2 HKC 445. Of course, if the vendor’s solicitor or counsel is not prepared to give such an undertaking to stamp prior to completion, the vendor will have committed a repudiatory breach of the sale and purchase agreement by failing to show good title entitling the purchaser to rescind: Sun Champ Investment Ltd v Green Leaves Trade Investment Ltd (2013) DCMP 706/2013.
P797: THE ATTESTATION OF DOCUMENTS
P799: Note the rules as to attestation of conveyancing documents. Attestation not required as a matter of law: see Champhon Industrial Ltd v Hight Projects Industrial Ltd (unreported) HCMP 3631/1992, 29/12/1992; yet it is required as a matter of good practice. Note rules relating to attestation of documents in Hong Kong for use in PRC and attestation of documents overseas for use in Hong Kong: see Law Society Circular No 226 of 1997. 
P802: PART D: DISCREPANCIES IN SIGNATURES, NAMES, PASSPORT NUMBERS AND ID NUMBERS
P804: (A) Discrepancies in signatures, names, passport numbers or id numbers
P806: (i) Consistency in signatures and names
P808: In proving title, the vendor must also ensure that there are no significant signature or name discrepancies in the title deeds, eg a purchaser executed a sale and purchase agreement as Chan TS and then sold and assigned under the name Michael Chan Ting-sum. The vendor must prove that the signatures and names are of the same person.
P811: See Ma Chun-man v Yung, Yung, Yu, Yuen & Co [1978] HKLR 26 (signature discrepancies; title defective and solicitors found negligent); Chudai (HK) Development Co Ltd v Portia International Ltd [1992] 1 HKLR 350 (use of alias in subsequent assignment cured by statutory declaration of signatory); Many Wise Investments Ltd v Tech Profit Development Ltd [1993] 2 HKC 517 (long period of time between signatures; one by brush, one by pen; title not defective); Liu Moon Ping v Wong Kwok Tung [2006] 1 HKLRD 358 (party executed one title document (a power of attorney) by using English signature and Australian passport number; subsequent sale and purchase agreement and assignment executed using Chinese name and HK id card number; held that there was a significant discrepancy in signatures and statutory declaration was required).
P813: Problems can also arise where a name is mis-spelt: Sunluck International Development Ltd v Hing King Development Ltd (unreported) HCMP 3160/1997, 21/11/1997 (error in Chinese characters on company chop; no real risk on the facts).
P816: (ii) Discrepancies in passport numbers
P818: There should be no expectation that passport numbers will remain the same: see Free Focus Ltd v Fels China Ltd [1989] 2 HKC 568 (different passport numbers caused no real risk); Yiu Ping Fong v Lam Lai Hing [1999] 1 HKLRD 793 (court observed that passport numbers would usually change when a new passport was issued; held that the fact that different Taiwanese passport numbers had been used to describe the same party in two assignments executed in 1986 and 1990 respectively was not material). 
P820: (iii) Consistency in id numbers
P822: Different id numbers would, however, be a cause for concern since id numbers are rarely changed. See Qin Tian v 譚震 (unreported) DCCJ 3712/2014, 22/07/2016 (held that discrepancy in Mainland id card numbers used by Mainlander to execute documents for use in Hong Kong was cause for serious concern).
P824: It must be borne in mind, however, that plastic id cards were only introduced in the 1960s so that a discrepancy in an id number prior to that date would be no cause for concern: see Lai Wai v Lee Yuet Yung Pat [2012] 5 HKC 163. 
P826: (B) Remedying the defect
P828: The defect can best be remedied by a statutory declaration by the person who has executed the documents verifying that both signatures and names are his: Lam Kin I v Tsui Ming Yee (unreported) HCMP 361/1989, 24/02/1989. A statutory declaration by the solicitor who acted for the signatory on the two occasions may also suffice: GB Industries Ltd v Yu Chung Kwok (unreported) HCMP 1060/1994, 07/06/1994. 
P830: Further, the court has ruled in Chan Hei Leung Thomson v Kuo Yuo-chien (unreported) DCMP 1271/2012,10/09/2012 that, although a statutory declaration made by the signatory himself would be the best remedy, the court may receive direct oral evidence from the solicitor involved by way of identifying the signatory whose identity is in question.
P833: PART E: DISCREPANCIES IN PROPERTY DESCRIPTION
P835: For problems as to the ascertainment of land boundaries see Tam Mo Yin v Attorney
P836: General [1996] 1 HKC 379 (plan lost; assignment only referred to acreage)
P838: The number of shares allocated to a flat in a multi-storey building must be clearly delineated: cf Lee Tak Chun v East Weal International Ltd [1994] 1 HKC 722 (sub- deed of mutual covenant required); Marking Ltd v Cheerifat Investment Ltd (1995) HCMP 2727/1995, 31/10/1995 (no sub-deed of mutual covenant but control card in Registry and Share Apportionment document lodged in Registry sufficed); Goldjet International 
P840: Investment Ltd v Ling Ki Wai [1997] 3 HKC 503 (sub-division registers opened and control card showed allocation of shares); Hinex Universal Design Consultants Co Ltd v Chan Lai Hing [1998] 1 HKC 317 (proof by production of control card in Land Registry). 
P842: There is no duty to show how the other shares have been allocated: Sheenip Industries
P843: Ltd v Champion Billion Development Ltd (unreported) HCMP 1390/1995, 04/07/1995. 
P845: Non-correspondence of the actual building with the plans might render the title defective: see Fan Tony v Incorporated Owners of Kung Lok Building [2006] 3 HKC 240 (car-park as shown on dmc plan had been moved and guard post constructed on the location; held mandatory injunction should be granted ordering car park to be reinstated by incorporated owners).
P849: PART F: DEALING WITH DEFECTS AND CONFIRMATORY ASSIGNMENTS
P851: (A) Can a vendor cure a defective title by paying money to a stakeholder or giving an indemnity or undertaking on the basis that he will cure the defect after completion?
P853: The case authorities are inconsistent.
P855: (i) Cases where such remedy rejected
P857: See Chan Fung Lan v Lai Wai Chuen [1997] 1 HKC 1 (potential liability for estate duty on gift; offer by vendor to hand over to his solicitors as stakeholders a sum of money to cover any potential liability; held applying Re Heaysman’s and Tweedy’s Contract (1893) 69 LT 91 that a purchaser was not bound to accept an offer of indemnity (or presumably a solicitor’s undertaking), however reasonable the offer might be); Tsang Kwok Hung Frederick v Ching Lai Tuen [2008] 6 HKC 420 itle encumbered by notice to fix drainage pipe and window; offer by vendor to pay money to purchaser’s solicitor as stakeholder; held by court not acceptable by way of giving good title).
P859: (ii) Cases where such remedy ruled acceptable
P861: By contrast, however, in Lam Mee Hing v Chiang Shu Yin [1995] 3 HKC 247, where a repairing order had been registered against slopes which formed part of the common parts of a building, a purchaser was held not to be entitled to rescind upon the vendor giving an undertaking, which had to be fortified, that he would be responsible for the apportioned costs of remedial work to the slopes. An undertaking was similarly held sufficient in Hu Mei Yu Anastasia v King Best Enterprises Ltd (unreported) HCA 9317/1998, 10/07/2000 ; Luk Ho Chang v Fook Man Finance Co Ltd [2006] 2 HKLRD 489 (liability of vendor for repairs to multi-storey building still to be carried out; held that requisition satisfactorily answered by vendor undertaking to pay reasonable sum to vendor’s solicitor as stakeholder to cover vendor’s likely contribution to repairs); E-Global Ltd v Trenda Ltd [2013] 5 HKC 192 (payment of sum of $50,000 to solicitor as stakeholder acceptable to comply post-completion with breaches of fire safety regulations in large multi-storey building).
P863: It is difficult to reconcile the above decisions as a matter of principle. Clearly the issues involved are fact specific. As a matter of principle the `robust’ approach to conveyancing endorsed by Litton PJ in Mexon Holdings Ltd v Silver Bay International Ltd [2000] 1 HKLRD 935, [2000] 2 HKC 1, CFA, wherein the learned judge suggested that `conveyancing transactions should be approached from the standpoint of a willing purchaser and a willing vendor, both possessed of reasonably robust common sense, both intending to see the transaction through to completion’ should be favoured. A reasonable purchaser should normally be prepared to accept a sensible (ie reasonable in terms of quantum and enforceability) offer of a fortified indemnity or payment of likely expenses to the purchaser’s solicitor as stakeholder where the defect can realistically only be remedied post-completion. The more minor the defect was, the more reasonable it would be for the vendor to accept a remedy of this nature.
P865: (B) Confirmatory assignments
P867: (i) What defects can best be cured by way of a confirmatory assignment?
P869: There are several defects which can best, or only, be cured by a confirmatory  assignment. This is especially true where the defect is such that either the legal or equitable estate has remained vested in a previous party by reason of the defective execution of a deed or the omission of a necessary party to an assignment. This would be the case, for example, (i) where a company seal is missing (pre 3 March 2014); (ii) where a company’s common seal does not comply with the sealing requirements laid down in s 93(1) of the Companies Ordinance (pre 3 March 2014) or s 124 of the Companies Ordinance (Cap 622) (post 3 March 2014); (iii) where a mortgage or charge has not been properly reassigned, released or discharged; (iv) where the wrong number of shares have been assigned or released; (v) where an occupier has contributed to the purchase price or made mortgage repayments thereby acquiring an equitable interest in the property or has acquired an interest by way of a common intention constructive trust; and (vi) where property has been assigned into the name of a nominee and the nominator has not renounced his equitable interest in the property. But what about defective attestation?
P871: See eg Li Kwan Chuen v Vector Development Ltd [2009] 3 HKLRD 511 (on assignment company affixed seal of director instead of company’s common seal; held assignment void and confirmatory assignment required).
P873: (ii) Execution of the confirmatory assignment 
P874:  
P875: It should also be noted that the Registrar of the High Court has power (following an order from a judge) to execute a deed to cure a defective title under s 25A of the High Court Ordinance (so does the Registrar of the District Court under s 38A, District Court Ordinance) where the party who is required to execute the deed neglects or refuses to do so or cannot be found. See, eg, Lam Kiu Shing v Yau Fuk [2016] 3 HKLRD 242 (the court ordered a confirmatory assignment to be executed by the High Court Registrar to remedy the defective execution of an assignment made during the Japanese occupation of Hong Kong under the Land Transactions (Enemy Occupation) Ordinance (Cap 256)).
P877: In Chong Chi Ting Chris v Kin On Building (IO) [2023] HKDC 325, it was held that the current practice was not for the Court to execute a conveyance of property for and on behalf of the a person unless there were special or exceptional circumstances. The court appointed a partner of the plaintiff’s law firm to carry out all the necessary executions for the confirmatory assignment for and on behalf of the predecessors-in-title. Further, the Secretary for Justice was nominated to execute the confirmatory assignment on behalf of the developer.           
P879: Execution by the Company Registrar
P881: Further, the Company Registrar has power, after a company has been dissolved, to execute a document on behalf of that company under the former s 291B of the Companies Ordinance (Cap 32) and s 757 of the new Companies Ordinance (Cap 622).
P883: (C) Vesting orders
P885: Vesting orders have been used more regularly in recent times to cure a defective title. The court has power under s 45(b)(iii), Trustee Ordinance to make a vesting order in several different situations including where land is vested in a person as trustee (for example, a vendor of land after signature of the sale and purchase agreement) and it appears to the court to be expedient to make a vesting order (ie an order vesting the land in the beneficiary. 
P887: See Wong Shuk-ying v Attorney General [1987] HKLR 985 (legal estate in land still vested in company (although equitable interest had passed under the sale and purchase agreement) which had ineffectually attempted to assign that land and then gone into liquidation; vesting order made in favour of purchaser); Chung Ka Leung v Secretary for Justice (1999) HCMP 4129/99 (company vendor had failed to attest affixing of common seal in accordance with articles; vesting order made); Tam Chi Kwong v Secretary for Justice [2007] 4 HKC 62, [2007] 2 HKLRD 373 (company as confirmor affixed wrong common seal; company had been wound up; vesting order made); Fook Tai Investment Co Ltd v Secretary for Justice [2014] 1 HKC 192, [2013] 4 HKLRD 102. 
P889: The applicable legal principles are summarized by Recorder William Wong SC in Lead Properties Ltd v Secretary of Justice [2022] HKCFI 3297
P891: A vesting order is especially useful where the equitable interest has passed under the sale and purchase agreement but the assignment is defective to transfer the legal estate.
P894: (D) DEFECTIVE TITLES AND THE `NO REAL RISK’ TEST
P896: As we have seen in the last lecture, where a purchaser raises a requisition challenging the vendor’s title as not being good (in other words being only doubtful) the vendor will attempt to show that there is no real risk of the vendor’s title being challenged either by reason of an encumbrance affecting the property or grounds such as an unauthorized structure rendering the title defeasible. If there is no real risk the title will be good. As Bokhary PJ said in the Court of Final Appeal in Chi Kit Co Ltd v Lucky Health International Enterprise Ltd (2000) 3 HKCFAR 268 at 282-283:
P898: The burden is on the vendor to prove a good title to a very high standard of proof beyond reasonable doubt that the purchaser will not be at risk of a successful assertion against him of an encumbrance (MEPC v Christian Edwards [1981] AC 205 at 222). The vendor discharges his obligation if he shows to that standard that he is in a position to convey the estate or interest contracted to be sold `without any blot or possibility of litigation to the purchaser’ (Re Stirrup’s Contract [1961] 1 WLR 449 at 454).
P900: Whether there is a real risk will, of course, be considered in the context of `a willing purchaser and willing vendor both possessed of reasonably robust common-sense, both intending to see the transaction through to completion in terms of their own bargain’: Mexon Holdings Ltd v Silver Bay International Ltd (2000) 3 HKCFAR 109, 117. Many titles have been held to be good by the courts on the strength of the application of the `no real risk’ test.
P902: We suggest, however, that the `no real risk’ test has no application in any case where the title is `bad’. In other words a `bad’ title is a title that cannot be remedied by showing that there is no real risk of an adverse claim against the title. The only method of remedy will be by way of a confirmatory assignment or vesting order. What are examples of bad titles? We would suggest the following list (which is certainly not intended to be complete) 
P904: where a company’s common seal is missing from a deed (pre 3 March 2014); 
P905: where the wrong common seal has been used; 
P906: where a company’s common seal does not comply with the sealing requirements laid down in s 93(1) of the Companies Ordinance (metallic common seal with the company’s name engraven legible thereon) (pre 3 March 2014) or s 124 of the Companies Ordinance (Cap 622) (post 3 March 2014); 
P907: where a deed has been executed by a company but the requirements as to attestation laid down in the company’s articles of association have not been complied with and no remedy is provided by ss 20(1), 23 or 23A of the Conveyancing and Property Ordinance; 
P908: where the company’s common seal has been affixed by way of defrauding the company;  
P909: where a mortgage or charge has not been properly reassigned, released or discharged;
P910: where the wrong number of shares have been assigned by an assignor or released by a mortgagee; 
P911: where an occupier, who has contributed to the purchase price or has paid some of the mortgage repayments, has thereby acquired an interest by way of resulting trust; and
P912: where property has been assigned into the name of a nominee who holds in favour of the nominator by way of resulting trust.
P914: This can be explained more fully by considering some of the examples given above in greater detail. Let us suppose that there is no common seal affixed to a deed purportedly executed by a corporation or the common seal has not been fixed in compliance with the sealing requirements of the Companies Ordinance. This latter situation occurred in On Hong Trading Co Ltd v Bank of Communications (unreported) HCMP 3099/1999, 29/02/2000, a case in which a rubber chop had been used instead of a metallic seal on an intended mortgage to a bank. Recorder Robert Kotewall SC held that the mortgage was void and the bank had no power to sell the property when the mortgagor defaulted on repayment. Since the deed was void the only remedy would be a remedial (confirmatory) assignment executed by the company (or in an appropriate case by the Registrar of the High Court under s 25A of the High Court Ordinance or the Registrar of Companies under s 291B of the Companies Ordinance). This defect could not be cured by application of the `no real risk’ test because the deed is void rather than voidable. Similarly, where the wrong common seal has been affixed to the deed, the legal estate will not pass and the appropriate remedy will be either a remedial assignment or (if the company has gone into liquidation) a vesting order. This was the remedy sought and granted in Capital Ltd v Secretary for Justice [2005] 4 HKC 84 and Tam Chi Kwong v Secretary for Justice [2007] 2 HKLRD 373.
P916: See also Au Wai Ming v Kam Tze Ming Alfred  [2009] 4 HKC 469, [2010] 1 HKLRD 198 (CA) (mortgage of property; deed of release executed by first mortgagee company in two capacities, first in its own right and secondly as attorney for second mortgagee; only one common seal affixed; held that execution defective and no effective release of mortgage); Li Kwan Chuen v Vector Development Ltd [2009] 3 HKLRD 511(on assignment company affixed seal of director instead of company’s common seal; held assignment void and confirmatory assignment required).
P918: The same conclusion must be reached where a deed has been executed by a company but the requirements as to attestation laid down in the company’s articles of association have not been complied with and no remedy is provided by ss 20(1), 23 or 23A of the Conveyancing and Property Ordinance. Let us hypothesise that the articles require attestation by two directors but there is only one attesting signatory. The deed in question is less than 15 years old. This defect falls, we believe, outside any of the three statutory provisions mentioned above and will not be cured by any of them. We suggest that the assignment will be void rather than voidable so that the legal estate will not have passed under the assignment. The purchaser will only have received the equitable interest under the sale and purchase agreement. This conclusion is supported, for example, by the judgment of Mayo J in Whole Year Development Ltd v Lung Chiu Yee Julia (unreported) HCMP 966/1993, 21/06/1993 (a case where the articles requires attestation by two directors but it was clear that the two attesting signatories were not directors) where the learned judge pointed out that:
P920: [W]here the requirements of the articles of association for the due execution of a deed had not been complied with … there has been no conveyance of the legal estate.
P922: The same conclusion will be reached where the company’s common seal has been affixed by way of defrauding the company. This conclusion is supported by the Court of Appeal in Hua Rong Finance Ltd v Mega Capital Enterprises Ltd [2001] 3 HKLRD 623, a case involving the mortgaging of a company’s property as a result of fraud on the part of a director executing the mortgage. Deputy Judge Whaley at first instance held that the mortgage was void and this conclusion was upheld by the Court of Appeal.
P924: In all the above situations the assignment or mortgage has been held to be void. If the deed is void, the legal estate will not have passed but will remain with the company and an assignee will receive no legal estate and a mortgagee no legal mortgage. Our view is that, in such situations, the defect cannot be cured under the `no real risk’ test laid down in MEPC v Christian Edwards [1981] AC 205, HL. Since the legal estate remains in the company (or liquidators) as vendor or mortgagor the mere passage of time (for however long a period) cannot have the effect of transferring the legal estate to the purchaser or mortgagee. This was recognized by Mayo J in Whole Year Development Ltd v Lung Chiu Yee Julia (unreported) HCMP 966/1993, 21/06/1993, where the learned judge said: 
P926: I do not consider that the MEPC test has any application to such a situation as the defendant (mortgagee) has no title to offer to the plaintiff.
P928: Turning to the other situations identified above, where a mortgage or charge has not been properly reassigned, released or discharged, the mortgagor will have an encumbered title which must be cured by a remedial (confirmatory) assignment: see Ko Lan v Hoo Man Kuen Martin (unreported) HCMP 4416/1998, 19/01/1999. Of course, the common law remedy of a declaration that the mortgage is no longer capable of taking effect (to this extent is could be argued that the `no real risk’ test is being applied) or the statutory remedy provided in section 12A of the Conveyancing and Property Ordinance may assist in appropriate cases. The only remedy where the wrong number of shares have been assigned by an assignor or released by a mortgagee will be a confirmatory assignment. In the latter two situations, the assignor’s title is defective because of the existence of an equitable interest in the occupier or nominator by way of resulting or constructive trust. The appropriate remedy here is a confirmatory assignment by the person in whom the equitable interest vests. The `no real risk’ test is similarly inapplicable. However long the owner waits, the defect will not go away!
P931: (E) The vendor's rescission clause
P933: It is common for the vendor to insert a clause (called a vendor's rescission clause) in the sale and purchase agreement giving him the right to rescind the agreement if the purchaser raises a requisition as to the vendor's title which the vendor is unable or (on the grounds of difficulty, delay or expense or on any other reasonable ground) unwilling to remove or comply with.
P935: This clause cannot be relied upon where: (a) the vendor has only a bad title; ie no title at all: Bowman v Hyland (1878) 8 ChD 588; or (b) the vendor is acting recklessly or in bad faith: Selkirk v Romar Investments Ltd [1963] 1 WLR 1415, 1423, PC; Lee Siu Wai Florence v Priway Investments Ltd [1998] 1 HKC 228 (vendor knew of defect - registration of previous sale and purchase agreement - but made no attempt to inform purchaser).
P937: A vendor’s rescission clause will not be implied into sale and purchase agreements: Gain Sky Ltd v Chau Tak Hing (unreported) HCA 917/2004, 23/12/2005; Tele Step Ltd v Pong Man Tat [2011] 1 HKLRD 645 (the court will not imply a vendor’s rescission clause as a term in sale and purchase agreements). 
P939: This topic is dealt with in LG8 on Formal Sale and Purchase Agreements.
P942: PART G: VENDOR WITH NO GOOD TITLE / UNABLE TO SHOW GOOD TITLE
P944: (A) Where repudiatory breach
P946: Breach of the duty to show title (either by failing to produce the required title documents or by failing to answer a requisition adequately) will constitute a repudiatory breach of the sale and purchase agreement entitling the purchaser to rescind: see Big Most Ltd v Chau Wa Hung [2012] 4 HKLRD 599.
P948: (B) The appropriate time for rescinding
P950: May the purchaser rescind immediately upon the commission of the breach?
P952: Subject to any contrary agreement, the vendor has a duty to give good title by the date of completion and the purchaser may not, therefore, rescind upon discovering a defect in title until completion in a case where the defect can be remedied prior to completion: Chu Wing Ning v Ngan Hing Cheung (1992) HCA 9409/1991. 
P954: Where, however, the defect in title is fundamental so that it cannot be removed prior to completion, the purchaser can rescind immediately: A-Mayson Development Co Ltd v Betterfit Ltd [1992] 2 HKC 533; Continental Zone Ltd v More Glory International Ltd (unreported) HCMP 446/2012, 18/04/2013 (the question arose whether the rescission by the purchaser had been premature; Dty Judge Leung, SC, noted that in Peyman v Lanjani [1985] Ch 457, CA, Slade LJ had stated that a purchaser might immediately rescind when he became aware of an irremovable defect in title; this principle had been approved by Barnett J in Lucky Health International Enterprise Ltd v Chi Kit Co Ltd [1998] 4 HKC 656 at 671; in the instant case the defects were irremovable by the completion date and the purchaser had, subject to the argument about substantial performance, been entitled to rescind).
P956: See also Sun Champ Investment Ltd v Green Leaves Trade Investment Ltd (unreported) DCMP 706/2013, 25/10/2013 (Dty Judge Andrew Li held that the purchaser had been entitled to rescind the sale and agreement shortly before the time fixed for completion since the defect involved misrepresentation of the saleable area of the property and such defect in title was irremovable). 
P958: Of course, as we have seen above, the court might be satisfied by the vendor’s offer of a post-completion remedy such as payment to a stakeholder or an offer of a fortified indemnity.
P961: (C) VENDOR AND PURCHASER SUMMONSES
P963: Scope of the statutory procedure. This procedure is provided by s 12, Conveyancing and Property Ordinance. Either the vendor or purchaser may apply to the court (the Court of First Instance unless the parties agree to confer jurisdiction upon the District Court) by originating summons in respect of any question arising out of or connected with any contract for the sale or exchange of land (not being a question affecting the validity of the contract or relating to compensation payable by the Government). The usual application asks the court to decide two questions (i) whether the vendor has shown good title; and (ii) whether the vendor has answered the purchaser's requisitions adequately.
P965: See Wide Link Ltd v Tam Sing Cheong [1999] 3 HKC 405 (HCt has jurisdiction under section 12 CPO to decide whether P could rescind on grounds of misrepresentation and to order return of purchaser's deposit).
P967: Lai Ke Bin v Capital Project Development Ltd [2009] 1 HKC 93, [2009] 2 HKLRD 49 (court has jurisdiction to order specific performance on vendor and purchaser summons, per Dty Judge Au).
P969: Misuse of the vendor and purchaser procedure. The procedure must not be used by way of ex parte application: Re Kwong Sin Tong (unreported) HCMP 2797/1993, 03/08/1993.
P971: The procedure should not be used for solicitors to protect themselves at their clients' expense.
P973: See Keith J in Castle City Ltd v Choi Yue Development Ltd [1995] 2 HKC 593. 
P976: The procedure should not be used for trivial matters; Cheung J said in Guang Xin Enterprises Ltd v Leung Kwai Mui [1996] 4 HKC 572:
P978: I would like to add that solicitors who handle conveyancing matters must take upon themselves to decide whether there any merits in requisitions on title. There are far too many vendor and purchaser summonses on title which are extremely trivial in nature and do not require the adjudication of the court. If the vendor's solicitors regard that requisitions have been answered, they should press for completion leaving the purchaser and his solicitors to decide whether to complete or not or face the risk of having the deposit forfeited or the possibility of a lawsuit.
P980: The procedure should not be used to ask the court for an advisory opinion on his title.
P982: See Cheng Sin Yau v Wong Kam Pui Dicky (unreported) HCMP 98/2015, 09/03/2015.
P985: Professor Michael Wilkinson (updated by Dr. Richard Wu 2019-2025)
P987: Revised by Alwin Chan
P989: September 2026